Bush Proposal For Iraq Adds To '08 Intrigue

        Bush Plan for Iraq Swells ’08 Intrigue

On Friday morning, as the capital was enmeshed in a debate over President Bush's decision to send thousands more troops to Iraq, no one was more obviously searching for an alternate plan than Senator Hillary Rodham Clinton, the New York Democrat and likely candidate for president.
        Mrs. Clinton was airborne for Iraq, a visit that offered a platform to examine and perhaps alter her views on a war that she once voted to authorize but now criticizes. Asked in a telephone interview from Kuwait whether this trip might lead her to support setting a firm deadline for the withdrawal of all American troops, which would be a change in her position, she responded: ''Those are questions that we'll be better able to answer later. Obviously I'll have more to say when I get back.''
        Around the same time in Washington, Senator John McCain, the Arizona Republican and likely candidate for president, threw the White House something of a lifeline during a Congressional hearing (which Mrs. Clinton herself was supposed to attend), vigorously defending Mr. Bush's decision.
        ''Potentially catastrophic consequences of failure demand that we do all we can to prevail in Iraq,'' Mr. McCain said.
        As the politics of the war continue to shift, no prospective presidential candidates face more intensive scrutiny of their views or greater risk to their ambitions than Mr. McCain and Mrs. Clinton.
        Long a proponent of sending more American forces into the fight, Mr. McCain now more than ever is linked to a war that has splintered his party and lost public support.
        Viewed with suspicion by elements of her party because she has not explicitly repudiated her October 2002 vote authorizing military action against Iraq, Mrs. Clinton, who was in Baghdad on Saturday, has been trying to shore up her credentials as a critic of the war without exposing herself to charges of indecisiveness or flip-flopping of the sort that so damaged Senator John Kerry in his unsuccessful race against Mr. Bush in 2004.
        More than any other single event in recent months, Mr. Bush's call for more troops has not only illuminated the positions taken by Mr. McCain and Mrs. Clinton and the differences between them, but it has also led the field of declared and prospective candidates circling them within their own parties to stake out more clearly defined positions on the war.
        Among Republicans, a result has been a deep split suggesting that Mr. McCain will face challenges on the war from fellow Republicans long before he has to worry about Mrs. Clinton and other Democrats. Mitt Romney, the former governor of Massachusetts who had until this week declined to say whether he supported more troops, issued brief remarks supporting the president. Rudolph W. Giuliani, the former New York mayor, also supported it, comparing it to what he did in fighting crime as mayor.
        But Senator Sam Brownback of Kansas, who is positioning himself as an alternative to Mr. McCain among conservatives, denounced Mr. Bush's plan, as did Senator Chuck Hagel of Nebraska, who like Mr. McCain is a Vietnam veteran but who long ago broke with the White House over its handling of the war.
        Among Democrats, opposition to Mr. Bush's plan highlighted the political threat Mrs. Clinton faces from the left. John Edwards, the former senator from North Carolina who voted for the war in 2002 but who, unlike Mrs. Clinton, later renounced his vote, sent an e-mail message to his supporters urging them to oppose Mr. Bush's action.
        Senator Barack Obama of Illinois, who joined the Senate in 2005 and thus escaped the Iraq vote that has come to haunt Mrs. Clinton, Mr. Edwards and Mr. Kerry, used the platform of Senate hearings to lacerate the Bush Iraq policy and affirm his own opposition to the war.
        Their actions offered an obvious contrast with those of Mrs. Clinton, who put out a measured statement opposing the troop increase but has stayed away from the Senate vanguard opposing Mr. Bush's latest strategy.
        Still, none of the other potential 2008 presidential candidates have seen their ambitions complicated by the events this week as much as Mr. McCain and Mrs. Clinton have. Their responses to Mr. Bush's actions offered insights into their views on Iraq and the styles they would bring to a presidential campaign.
        Mr. McCain embarked on a high-profile television tour announcing his support for Mr. Bush's move. In an interview, he said he would have preferred that the White House send in even more troops, and noted that he had pressed this position on the White House, unsuccessfully until now, for more than two years. It is a position that Mr. McCain and his advisers -- and some other Republicans -- said could end up destroying his presidential ambitions.
        ''Friends, advisers, enemies said this could be very damaging,'' Mr. McCain said. ''I can't worry about that, and I'm not going to worry about that.''
        Some Republicans suggested that Mr. McCain's position could help him, albeit to a limited extent, among conservative Republican primary voters who have been wary of his view on social issues. And, as Mr. McCain's own remarks suggested, his stance fits neatly into his effort over the years to present himself as a politician given to candor even if it means telling voters things they do not want to hear.
        Still, by any measure, support for the war could make things extremely difficult for Mr. McCain in a general election if the situation in Iraq does not improve and public opinion in the United States does not shift in favor of continued engagement.
        Mr. McCain did not dispute the political risks entailed in the stance he had taken.
        ''The consequences of failure are more important than a political career,'' he said. ''It could hurt me in a primary and it could hurt me in a general election. This could hurt me in history.''
        He said he was hopeful that this new Iraq strategy would work but did not know how long it would take, a crucial question in trying to gauge how central an issue this will be as the campaign engages.
        In a hint of what next year could be like, Mr. Edwards has taken to calling the Bush proposal an endorsement of ''the McCain doctrine,'' a description that Mr. McCain and his aides have gamely embraced.
        ''I was glad to see that Romney and Giuliani have come around to embracing the McCain doctrine, as John Edwards would say,'' said Terry Nelson, the head of Mr. McCain's presidential exploratory committee.
        If Mr. McCain has flaunted his unpopular position, Mrs. Clinton has clearly kept a lower altitude as she tries to deal with a barrage of conflicting pressures. Unlike Mr. McCain and Mr. Obama, who were everywhere on television the night of Mr. Bush's speech, Mrs. Clinton simply issued a late-evening e-mail statement saying that based on what Mr. Bush had said, she did not support the increase.
        Last year, Mrs. Clinton took a leading role in criticizing Donald H. Rumsfeld, then the secretary of defense, over his management of the war. Over the past two years, she has voted in favor of resolutions calling for a phased withdrawal of troops without setting fixed deadlines.
        Even though Mrs. Clinton has never gone as far as Mr. Edwards and Mr. Kerry with a renunciation of her 2002 vote, she has subtly expanded her position recently in recognition, her advisers said, of how much that vote accounted for the resistance to her among some Democrats.
        In a little-noticed interview on the ''Today'' show just before Christmas, Mrs. Clinton made a significant addition to her standard remark about the 2002 vote. Asked if she considered the vote a mistake, she responded: ''Obviously if we knew then what we know now, there wouldn't have been a vote, and I certainly wouldn't have voted that way.''
        The last eight words are new for her.
        Some Democrats suggested that Mrs. Clinton's trip this weekend was intended to give her an opportunity to move further away from that vote and against the president's policy.
        ''I will be spending time with the Iraqi leaders and sitting down and trying to get my own personal assessment of what their intentions are, what do they intend to do to take responsibility for their own security,'' she said in the interview. ''If they're not going to step up and try to bring some stability and end the violence in Baghdad, I don't care how many troops the president sends -- it's not going to be successful.''
        Mrs. Clinton and Mr. McCain have no doubt learned a lesson from Mr. Kerry's problems in 2004 when he appeared to switch his position on the war: that inconsistency may well prove to be a bigger political sin than taking a position out of step with the electorate. Mrs. Clinton's associates have expressed concern that if she tries to switch her views on the war, reflecting what her advisers said was concern, she would appear weak as she campaigned during a time of war to become the nation's first female president.