Ex-Arkansas Governor Takes Step Toward '08 Candidacy

Former Gov. Mike Huckabee of Arkansas announced Sunday that he was forming a presidential exploratory committee, mounting an underdog campaign for the Republican nomination with ''a message of hope and optimism for restoring America.''
        Mr. Huckabee, 51, is a Baptist minister who served more than 10 years as governor of Arkansas and has close ties with many Christian conservatives. He enters a race largely dominated, so far, by heavyweights like Senator John McCain of Arizona, former Gov. Mitt Romney of Massachusetts and former Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani of New York. Also, Mr. Huckabee faces stiff competition for the social conservative vote, his natural base, from Senator Sam Brownback of Kansas.
        Still, in an interview, Mr. Huckabee was bullish.
        ''It's about getting the message to connect with Republican activists and voters, who may not see their guy on the field yet,'' Mr. Huckabee said. He also criticized the emphasis on fund-raising prowess as a measure of political viability. ''It makes me wonder if we should just put the presidency up on eBay,'' he said.
        On Sunday, Mr. Huckabee affirmed his support for President Bush's call for an increase in American troops in Iraq. ''He's got to be given the opportunity to do his job,'' Mr. Huckabee said.
        In an interview on the NBC news program ''Meet the Press,'' where Mr. Huckabee announced his candidacy, he said that ''to oppose a sitting commander in chief while we've got people being shot at on the ground'' could be ''a very risky thing to our troops.''
        He also spoke about his staunch opposition to abortion rights, saying, ''I always am going to err on the side of life.'' But the anti-abortion movement, he said, has to do ''some growing and expanding.''
        ''We have to remind people that life, where we believe it begins at conception, it doesn't end at birth,'' Mr. Huckabee added. ''And if we're really pro-life, we have to be concerned about more than the gestation period.''
        When asked during the television program if he had ''a problem with gay people,'' Mr. Huckabee replied, ''No, I have a problem with changing institutions that have served us,'' notably marriage. ''Before we change the definition of marriage to mean something different, I think our real focus ought to be on strengthening heterosexual marriages because half of them are ending in divorce,'' he said.
        Asked about a recent Democratic entrant to the 2008 field, Senator Hillary Rodham Clinton, Mr. Huckabee said that she would ''absolutely'' be a formidable candidate, and added, ''I think people underestimate her at their own peril.''