White House Bid? Giuliani Is Still Undeclared

        White House Bid? Giuliani Is Still Undeclared

Former Senator John Edwards stood in the Ninth Ward of New Orleans and declared, ''I'm a candidate for the presidency of the United States.'' Senator Hillary Rodham Clinton proclaimed on her campaign Web site: ''I'm in. And I'm in to win.'' Former Gov. Mitt Romney of Massachusetts plans to formally announce his White House run in Michigan on Feb. 13.
        Rudolph W. Giuliani, the former mayor of New York, took two steps closer to a presidential run on Monday, and yet stopped short, once again, of unequivocally throwing himself in the ring.
        After filing a candidate statement with the Federal Election Commission, he appeared on Fox News Channel's ''Hannity &amp; Colmes'' for an interview, and Sean Hannity asked, ''You are then officially running to be the next president of the United States?'' Mr. Giuliani's response was cautious: ''We still have to formally announce it and do a few more things. But this is about as close as you're going to get.''
        When asked if he believed he could defeat Mrs. Clinton -- if they received their respective parties' nominations -- Mr. Giuliani said, ''Well, I'm in this to win,'' but he added, ''I have no idea who is going to get the nomination.''
        A few skeptics have wondered whether Mr. Giuliani, who has been crisscrossing the country over the last few months and signaled his interest in the presidency again and again, may ultimately back out -- as he did in 2000, when he contemplated a race for the Senate but withdrew.
        Aides to Mr. Giuliani yesterday dismissed the notion that he was equivocating. ''The response across the country has been extremely encouraging, and Rudy has made clear he is moving toward making an official announcement,'' said Katie Levinson, a spokeswoman for Mr. Giuliani's not-yet-official campaign.
        Mr. Giuliani established a federal presidential exploratory committee on Nov. 20 to ''test the waters,'' meaning that he could raise and spend money on polls, focus groups and travel but not declare a candidacy or build a substantial war chest.
        On Monday, Mr. Giuliani stopped testing the waters when he filed the statement of candidacy.
        ''From the F.E.C.'s perspective, he's running for president of the United States,'' said Karl J. Sandstrom, an election lawyer and a former Democratic member of the Federal Election Commission. Typically, he said, a statement of candidacy and a formal announcement of a run occur around the same time.
        Bradley A. Smith, an election lawyer and a former Republican member of the commission, said that filing a candidate statement was not a definitive step. ''People in the past have filed that form and then decided not to run,'' he said. ''Filing the form may just mean that he's planning to raise some serious money that would put him outside of what the F.E.C. considers testing the waters.''
        Mr. Giuliani has recently moved to sell Giuliani Capital Advisors, an investment bank that is part of his consulting business, Giuliani Partners. But a candidacy would not necessarily complicate any sale of his assets.
        Candidates for president are required to file personal financial disclosure statements with the federal Office of Government Ethics. Those who declare between Jan. 1 and May 15 must file by May 15. Those who declare their candidacies between May 15 and Dec. 31 must file the statement within 30 days of the declaration, according to Vincent J. Salamone, associate general counsel for the ethics office.
        The statements require candidates to disclose financial interests, including sources of income, investment holdings and outstanding loans, going back a year from the filing date. Corporate directorships, partnerships and consulting contracts must be disclosed for the previous two years.
        Fred Siegel, a historian at Cooper Union who has written admiringly about Mr. Giuliani, said he thought the former mayor was simply being deliberate. ''He moves at his own pace,'' Mr. Siegel said. ''He thinks these things through very carefully, and I think he's playing this out for tactical advantage.''
        Katon Dawson, chairman of the South Carolina Republican Party, said it was ''a lot easier to get in the race than to get out of the race,'' and called Mr. Giuliani's actions so far ''a natural progression of how you would enter a race for president.''
        Mr. Dawson, who spoke warmly of Mr. Giuliani but has not endorsed any candidate, speculated that the former mayor might simply be choosing the right time and place to make an announcement. ''This is not unusual,'' he said. ''Whether it will be at ground zero, or in California or New Hampshire or Iowa or South Carolina, he will announce on his own terms, and pick his own turf.''
        In his Fox interview, Mr. Giuliani affirmed his support for abortion rights but said he would ''appoint judges that interpreted the Constitution rather than invented it.'' He said he approved of domestic partnership laws, but not same-sex marriage.
        He said repeatedly, ''We've got to get beyond Iraq,'' and called for more attention to Iran, Syria, Pakistan and Afghanistan. He called for tightening the country's borders and requiring prospective citizens to learn English, but also said that deporting illegal immigrants in large numbers was impractical.