GIULIANI SHIFTS ABORTION SPEECH GENTLY TO RIGHT

        Giuliani Shifts Abortion Speech Gently to Right

As he prepares for a possible run for president -- a road that goes deep into the heart of conservative America -- Rudolph W. Giuliani takes with him a belief in abortion rights that many think could derail his bid to capture the Republican nomination.
        But in recent weeks, as he has courted voters in South Carolina and talked to conservative media outlets, Mr. Giuliani has highlighted a different element of his thinking on the abortion debate. He has talked about how he would appoint ''strict constructionist'' judges to the Supreme Court -- what abortion rights advocates say is code among conservatives for those who seek to overturn or limit Roe v. Wade, the 1973 court ruling declaring a constitutional right to abortion.
        The effect has been to distance himself from a position favoring abortion rights that he espoused when he ran for mayor of New York City, where most voters favor abortion rights.
        ''I hate it,'' he said of abortion in a recent interview with Sean Hannity of Fox News. ''I think abortion is something that, as a personal matter, I would advise somebody against. However, I believe in a woman's right to choose. I think you have to ultimately not put a woman in jail for that.''
        For Mr. Giuliani, a Brooklyn-born Roman Catholic who once considered entering the priesthood, the issue has been a source of discomfort throughout his political career, especially during his first bid for mayor of New York nearly two decades ago.
        Now, as he courts voters in more conservative areas, Mr. Giuliani is turning to the same nuanced approach he used back then to explain how he can be both for abortion rights, while being morally opposed to abortion.
        While Mr. Giuliani also faces obstacles for his stands favoring gun control and gay rights, perhaps no social issue resonates as deeply in the hearts of Christian conservatives as abortion.
        In his recent travels, he has directed questions on the issue toward a discussion about judges, saying he would appoint jurists who believe in interpreting, not making, the law: judges, he said, like Chief Justice John G. Roberts Jr. and Justices Antonin Scalia and Samuel A. Alito Jr., who he has said he believed would place limits on Roe v. Wade.
        ''On the federal judiciary I would want judges who are strict constructionists because I am,'' he said last week in South Carolina. ''I have a very, very strong view that for this country to work, for our freedoms to be protected, judges have to interpret, not invent, the Constitution.
        ''Otherwise you end up, when judges invent the Constitution, with your liberties being hurt. Because legislatures get to make those decisions and the Legislature in South Carolina might make that decision one way and the Legislature in California a different one.''
        On the issue of a disputed abortion procedure called ''partial-birth abortion'' by opponents, he told Mr. Hannity that a ban signed into law by President Bush in 2003, which the Supreme Court is reviewing, should be upheld. And on the issue of parental notification -- whether to require minors to obtain permission from either a parent or a judge before an abortion -- he said, ''I think you have to have a judicial bypass,'' meaning a provision that would allow a minor to seek court permission from a judge in lieu of a parent.
        ''If you do, you can have parental notification,'' he said.
        Both appear to be shifts away from statements he made while he was mayor and during his brief campaign for United States senator in 2000. Asked by Tim Russert on ''Meet the Press'' in 2000 if he supported President Bill Clinton's veto of a law that would have banned the disputed abortion procedure, Mr. Giuliani said, ''I would vote to preserve the option for women.'' He added, ''I think the better thing for America to do is to leave that choice to the woman, because it affects her probably more than anyone else.''
        And on a 1997 candidate questionnaire from the National Abortion and Reproductive Rights Action League of New York, which Mr. Giuliani completed and signed, he marked ''yes'' to the question: Would you oppose legislation ''requiring a minor to obtain permission from a parent or from a court before obtaining an abortion.''
        Mr. Giuliani's campaign aides say his positions on abortion have not changed, and that his stand on what critics call partial-birth abortions has been mischaracterized, saying he opposed a ban only if it failed to include an exception to protect the life of the mother. But the ban vetoed by President Clinton did include such an exception.
        Those who have followed Mr. Giuliani's career say he is unlikely to undergo a radical shift in his views in the manner of Mitt Romney, a Republican rival and former Massachusetts governor who advocated abortion rights until about two years ago.
        Fred Siegel, author of ''Prince of the City: Giuliani, New York and the Genius of American Life,'' said Mr. Giuliani would likely be careful to avoid anything perceived as a flip-flop on the issue.
        ''Part of his appeal is that he doesn't bend in the wind,'' he said.
        But Richard Land, head of the public policy arm of the Southern Baptist Convention, said Mr. Giuliani's position was even more offensive than that of someone who believes abortion is morally acceptable.
        ''To say I think it's morally wrong, but I think it's a woman's choice is like saying I'm opposed to segregation but it ought to be left up to the store owner to decide,'' Mr. Land said. ''That's a preference, not a conviction.''
        Rancor coming from both sides of the abortion debate is nothing new to Mr. Giuliani. When he made his first bid for mayor in 1989, he was widely considered anti-abortion. His stance immediately proved problematic in a city heavily in favor of abortion rights. New York was the first state to legalize elective abortions, three years before Roe v. Wade.
        Early in the 1989 campaign, he told the city's Conservative Party leaders he was personally opposed to abortion and was for overturning Roe v. Wade, except in cases of rape or incest. At the same time he said he opposed criminal penalties and ultimately saw it as an issue of ''personal morality.''
        The distinctions he drew were subtle to the point of producing conflicting news accounts in which he was alternately described as favoring abortion rights and anti-abortion.
        The issue took on more importance that summer after a Supreme Court decision allowed states to put new restrictions on abortion. As criticism mounted, Mr. Giuliani remained silent for weeks after the decision. Finally, in late August of that year, he issued a statement seeking to ''clarify'' his position.
        Where he previously asserted that he would stay away from efforts to protect or overturn the state abortion law, he now said he would fight moves to make it illegal.
        Critics ascribed his switch to political opportunism. Chief among his critics were his rivals for the mayor's post, the incumbent, Mayor Edward I. Koch, and the eventual winner of that election, David N. Dinkins, both of whom accused him of heeding the advice of his campaign strategists over his conscience.
        Mr. Giuliani defended his change, saying it was the result of deep introspection, not political expediency. ''I had to spend time not only thinking about it, but talking about it with my wife and people close to me to focus on it in a closer way than I have in the past,'' he told The New York Times in an interview at the time.
        ''This is a guy who is a Catholic, who thought about going into the priesthood, he has close friends who are priests,'' said Mr.Siegel, ''when he realizes he can't get elected in New York if you're anti-abortion and he begins to modify his position, and eventually he goes all the way to being in favor of later-term abortions.''
        Fran Reiter, who was a deputy mayor under Mr. Giuliani and played key roles in two of his campaigns, believes his acceptance of abortion rights was heartfelt, not a political move. After winning the mayor's office in 1993, he supported and strengthened legislation protecting women's access to abortion clinics.
        The National Abortion and Reproductive Rights Action League of New York was so convinced, it remained neutral in the 1993 and 1997 mayoral races, and did so again when he briefly ran against Hillary Rodham Clinton for United States in 2000 before dropping out of the race.
        ''That tells you how strongly we felt, that we would actually remain neutral when he's running against the first lady of the United States,'' said Kelli Conlin, the state organization's president, who served on Mr. Giuliani's 1993 transition team and on several mayoral commissions.
        Now Ms. Conlin and other abortion rights advocates, including Ms. Reiter, say Mr. Giuliani clearly appears to be distancing himself from his former positions.
        ''The term strict constructionists has become a transparent code word for nominating judges who would overturn Roe, and both sides know it,'' Ms. Conlin said. ''I think this is a troublesome wink and a nod to the far right of the Republican Party, and that's not the Rudy Giuliani I know.''
        Buddy Witherspoon, Republican National Committeeman from South Carolina, said Mr. Giuliani's recent appearance with party leaders there shifted his and some others' perceptions of the candidate, though not enough to satisfy the most socially conservative among them.
        ''All I'd heard from the media is that he was a moderate in support of abortion,'' Mr. Witherspoon said, ''then I heard him say he did not support abortion, however he also said he did not think a woman should go to jail for having had an abortion.''
        Correction:  February 28, 2007, Wednesday  A front-page article on Feb. 10 about efforts by Rudolph W. Giuliani, a Republican presidential contender, to distance himself from the position favoring abortion rights that he espoused when he ran for mayor of New York attributed an erroneous distinction to New York State. It was the second state to legalize elective abortion -- not the first, which was Hawaii.