Today's Version of 'I Will Run' Is Way More Than 3 Little Words

It can be hard to keep track of everyone running for president, let alone those who are merely ''exploring'' it, ''unofficially running,'' ''testing the waters'' or ''starting a conversation with the American people.''
        This is the stutter-step season of the 2008 presidential campaign.
        Candidates keep announcing that they are running or almost certainly running, then, a few days or weeks later, saying so again while the news media dutifully record each step.
        This week, for instance, former Gov. Mitt Romney of Massachusetts -- a Republican who last month announced formation of an ''exploratory committee'' -- made more headlines by saying he would announce that he was going to run for president. Next week, in Michigan. And former Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani of New York declared this week that ''I'm in this to win'' after filing something called a ''statement of candidacy.''
        On Saturday, Senator Barack Obama, the Illinois Democrat who last month announced the creation of his presidential exploratory committee (after telling Tim Russert of NBC in October that he was thinking about maybe running) -- will finally make an ''announcement'' about his intentions at the Old State Capitol in Springfield, Ill.
        Why not just state the obvious?
        ''It is incumbent on us to keep the announcement top secret,'' said Robert Gibbs, an Obama spokesman.
        Mr. Gibbs cited the need to build ''suspense'' in order to ''draw as many reporters as possible into the frigid teen temperatures of Illinois in February.''
        Hint: Mr. Obama and a throng of reporters will travel from Springfield to Iowa and New Hampshire.
        There was actually a simpler, less media-saturated time when prospective candidates would just step up onto a podium somewhere and say they were running for president. And then they were running for president, no dilly-dallying, right down to business.
        But the process became more convoluted in 1974 with the advent of campaign finance laws that would eventually spur the creation of presidential exploratory committees. The law mandated that anyone spending more than $5,000 while considering a campaign had to declare it with the Federal Election Commission.
        ''The process became a vehicle for a candidate to get attention,'' said William Mayer, an expert on the presidential nominating process and an associate professor at Northeastern University in Boston.
        Mr. Mayer said the incremental announcement method took hold in the 1988 campaign for the Democratic nomination. He cites the rollouts of Senator Paul Simon of Illinois (who announced on April 9, 1987, that he would announce that he was going to run for president on May 18) and the Rev. Jesse Jackson (a Sept. 7 alert for an Oct. 10 official start).
        ''If you're an unknown candidate, your announcement is pretty much the one surefire way to get attention,'' Mr. Mayer said. ''So you might as well try to make it a twofer.''
        Or threefer, or whatever the media will bear, which is a lot, given the swaths of airspace and cyberspace to fill. The practice of politicians publicly belaboring their decisions has only become worse in recent years.
        ''Candidates stretch out the announcements because they can,'' said Elizabeth Wilner, the political director for NBC.
        Twenty-four-hour cable and Internet saturation, Ms. Wilner said, ''means there will always be someone waiting to report on every infinitesimal word change relating to their candidate status.''
        There are, of course, instances of would-be candidates forming exploratory committees that yield fruitless exploration. Senator Evan Bayh, Democrat of Indiana, formed one in December, only to announce a few weeks later that he was not running.
        There are also increasingly rare occasions when candidates dispense with all flirtation. The normally stem-winding Senator Joseph R. Biden Jr., Democrat of Delaware, proved a paragon of efficiency last month when he declared, ''No exploratory committee, I'm running.''
        Of course, Mr. Biden then proceeded to ruin his grand opening by remarking about Mr. Obama's being ''clean'' (which some viewed as racially offensive) and spending the aftermath apologizing for it.
        To ordinary Americans, the string-along announcements can be disorienting. There is, after all, something off-kilter about a system in which Senator Hillary Rodham Clinton, Democrat of New York, can say things like ''I'm in, and I'm in to win,'' which sounds like a clear declaration of her intentions and then goes on to establish ''an exploratory committee,'' a much less certain signal.
        Rest assured, barring some dramatic development, Mrs. Clinton is running for president. And she will say so formally in some production at a later time, according to her campaign. In the meantime, she will continue her ''conversation'' with the American people in New Hampshire this weekend.