Time to Throw Their Books Into the Ring

The lineup of potential presidential candidates is a mishmash of senators, governors, former big-city mayors and a retired four-star Army general.
        But nearly all of them share one title: published author.
        ''You're not a real candidate, Pinocchio, if you haven't written your own book,'' said Mark Halperin, the political director of ABC News. ''If you know everybody else is doing a book, you've got to do a book.''
        The crowded field of early candidates has created a traffic jam of titles, from the rags-to-riches memoir to the earnest political manifesto.
        All of them could be called candidate lit, a publishing minigenre that includes runaway best sellers (''The Audacity of Hope'' by Senator Barack Obama of Illinois) and unqualified duds (''Between Worlds,'' a memoir by Gov. Bill Richardson of New Mexico).
        For candidates, writing a book is a way to make money, build gravitas and grab media attention. (They can also use a memoir as a dumping ground for past unpleasantries, paving the way for the campaign-trail line ''I addressed that in my book.'')
        For publishers the 2008 campaign season is the time to rerelease forgotten titles, sign unpublished candidates and, if they're lucky, laugh all the way to the bank as they reap sales from best-selling political books. ''What you have, essentially, is a celebrity with built-in press coverage,'' said David Rosenthal, the publisher of Simon &amp; Schuster. Mr. Obama's latest book, for example, has sold more than a million copies in hardcover.
        Mr. Obama's publisher, Crown, just reissued his 1995 memoir, ''Dreams of My Father,'' in hardcover to capitalize on renewed interest. In December, Senator Hillary Rodham Clinton's publisher rereleased ''It Takes a Village'' in a 10th-anniversary edition, but it flopped, selling only 6,000 copies, according to Nielsen BookScan, which tracks sales in most bookstores and online retailers. Mr. Richardson's memoir will have another chance to succeed next month, when it is released in paperback.
        Mr. Obama's recent success has revived the notion of experiencing the pace and trappings of a presidential campaign through a book tour, said Chuck Todd, editor of the daily political tip sheet Hotline.
        ''The book publishing business has become the new exploratory committee,'' Mr. Todd said. ''For Obama, it was a way of testing the waters. That's when you find out: Are you interesting enough to get enough interviews? Can you get people to show up for a signing?''
        The tradition of candidate books dates back at least to the 1950s, when John F. Kennedy, then a United States senator, introduced himself as a viable presidential candidate with ''Profiles in Courage,'' which won a Pulitzer Prize in 1957.
        But even now that book is plagued by accusations that it was ghostwritten by Theodore Sorenson, a Kennedy aide. Many politicians employ ghostwriters, and some, like Senator John McCain of Arizona, are careful to give them prominent credit on the covers.
        Still, memories of ''Profiles in Courage'' have driven many candidates to produce their own version. ''They all think they're going to capture the 'Profiles in Courage' moment,'' Mr. Todd said.
        On the Democratic side Senator Clinton has four books; Senator Obama and former Senator John Edwards each have two; Mr. Richardson and Representative Dennis J. Kucinich of Ohio each have one. Senator Christopher J. Dodd of Connecticut has his first book, ''Letters From Nuremberg,'' coming out in September, an account of the Nuremberg trials, based on letters from his father, who was a prosecutor there.
        Senator Joseph R. Biden Jr. of Delaware is writing a book tentatively titled ''A Better Place,'' which a Random House spokeswoman called ''both a memoir and an overview of American politics today.'' (Gov. Tom Vilsack of Iowa has not written a book, but a spokeswoman said, ''He's working on one.'')
        The Republicans are similarly wordy. Mr. McCain has four books to his name; former Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani of New York, former Gov. Mitt Romney of Massachusetts, former Gov. Mike Huckabee of Arkansas, Senator Sam Brownback of Kansas and Representative Tom Tancredo of Colorado have one each. Senator Chuck Hagel of Nebraska just signed a contract with HarperCollins for a ''book about America's future,'' his spokesman said.
        There are three basic types of candidate books, said Peter Osnos, the founder and editor at large of PublicAffairs, which has published books by Mr. Obama, former President Bill Clinton and General Clark.
        The first is the ''introduction'' book, in which candidates without much name recognition introduce themselves to the public, as in Mr. Edwards's ''Four Trials,'' published as he announced his candidacy for president in 2003. Then there is the ''manifesto'' book, which typically outlines what a candidate would do if elected. The third category includes off-topic books like ''Earth in the Balance'' by Al Gore, and Mr. Dodd's forthcoming Nuremberg account.
        Steve Ross, the publisher of Crown, an imprint of Random House, said he was plagued by book proposals that are overly packaged or generic. ''The typical pack of candidate books are group-thought position papers,'' Mr. Ross said. ''Ghostwritten, shallow, totally controlled messages. Most of these books are going to be wastes of trees.'' (They are also open to mockery. Recall Al Franken's candidate-book spoof, ''Why Not Me?,'' written long before he became a real Senate candidate and adorned with a picture of Mr. Franken posing in a plaid shirt next to a golden retriever, and chapters with titles like ''The Courage to Dare'' and ''Daring to Dream.'')
        ''If a book is a narrative about who you are or something you believe in, it has to feel authentic,'' Mr. Osnos said. ''It has to feel that you're really writing about yourself. It has to feel honest, to the extent that any public figure is honest.''
        Using a book to predict a candidate's success, or even an undeclared candidate's secret intentions, is a tricky business. Mr. Gore, for instance, has not yet ruled out a presidential run, but his busy publishing activity could be interpreted by well wishers as a positive signal. His publisher rereleased ''Earth in the Balance'' last October, and he has written a young-adult version of ''An Inconvenient Truth'' for release in April. Mr. Gore also has a book coming out in May, ''The Assault on Reason,'' that fits squarely in the manifesto category of candidate lit.
        But political insiders caution against reading too much into the tea leaves. While Mr. Clinton and Mr. Gore's 1992 election-year manifesto, ''Putting People First,'' previewed a victory, John Kerry and Mr. Edwards's 2004 book, ''Our Plan for America,'' modeled on the Clinton-Gore book, fizzled with the public.
        And though Mr. McCain's 1999 book, ''Faith of My Fathers,'' was a critical success and a best seller, he failed to win the nomination in 2000. ''A Charge to Keep,'' by George W. Bush, was dismissed by critics as an expanded stump speech mostly written by Karen Hughes, his omnipresent communications adviser.
        The lesson? ''Candidates can win,'' said Mr. Halperin of ABC News, ''even if their books don't sell well.''
        Correction:  February 24, 2007, Saturday  An article in The Arts on Thursday about books by presidential candidates misstated part of the title of Senator Barack Obama's 1995 memoir, which has been reissued in hardcover to capitalize on renewed interest. It is ''Dreams From My Father,'' not ''Dreams of My Father.'' The article also misidentified the original publisher of that book and of a book by Bill Clinton. It was Times Books/Random House, not PublicAffairs.
        Correction:  March 12, 2007, Monday  An article on Saturday about fund-raising efforts in New York by Senator Barack Obama misspelled the surname of one of President John F. Kennedy's closest advisers, who introduced Mr. Obama at a fund-raiser. He is Theodore C. Sorensen, not Sorenson. The error also appeared in an article in The Arts on Feb. 22 about books written by candidates, including ''Profiles in Courage,'' which then-Senator Kennedy wrote with guidance from Mr. Sorensen. (The Times has misspelled Mr. Sorensen's surname more than 135 times in headlines and articles during the 50-plus years he has been a Democratic adviser and well-known author.)