End Our Pain: Hold Primary Right Now

        End Our Pain: Hold Primary Right Now

Efforts are astir in Albany to have New York join the herd of states swept up in the Feb. 5 stampede.
        One after another, clammy with fear of irrelevance, states have abandoned their traditional dates for presidential primaries, and moved up the voting to the first Tuesday in February 2008. New Jersey lawmakers took steps this week to join the crowd. California is headed in the same direction. Now, it seems, so is New York.
        The State Senate majority leader, Joseph L. Bruno, says the idea ''makes all kinds of sense.'' A spokesman for the Assembly speaker, Sheldon Silver, said yesterday that his boss would ''seriously consider it.'' The third component of the Albany troika, Gov. Eliot Spitzer, is undecided, a spokeswoman said yesterday, but few will be surprised if he goes along.
        Received wisdom is that by advancing the primary to Feb. 5 from its usual perch in March, New York would give a boost to its own: Senator Hillary Rodham Clinton on the Democratic side and former Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani on the Republican.
        Why that should be so is not clear, particularly in the case of Mr. Giuliani. Available evidence suggests that his popularity increases in direct proportion to his distance from New York, specifically from the city, where memories of the 9/10 Rudy have not been entirely zapped by 9/11.
        Whatever. Albany seems poised to act.
        Normally, it is not our place to advise politicians. But this is an urgent matter. The suggestion here is that everyone forget about Feb. 5. For the voters' well-being, we feel that the primary should be held right away -- next month, even sooner if possible. New York should encourage other states with New Hampshire envy to join it in one huge national primary, ASAP.
        Let's get this thing over with.
        Doesn't it already feel as if we have been Hillaryed, Obamaed, Rudyed and McCained forever? And we still have 87 weeks to go until Election Day 2008. How much pain can people be asked to endure?
        As matters stand, we have a fairly good idea who the candidates are and what they think on many issues. Enough already.
        By having a Mega-Super-Blockbuster Tuesday right now, we can winnow the race to one Republican and one Democrat. Doesn't that beat month upon month of bilge from a dozen or more quarters, including the Sabbath gasbags, to borrow Calvin Trillin's memorable description of the jabbering heads on Sunday morning television?
        For one thing, we would not have to put up with all these coy professions of candidacy, like the ''announcement preceding the formal announcement'' that Senator John McCain of Arizona made Wednesday night on David Letterman's talk show. At least Mr. McCain was forthright about a phony process in which ''you drag this out as long as you can.''
        WITH an immediate Mega-Super-Blockbuster primary, we could eliminate most of the firsts that have been dangled before us as if they bear life-altering potential. You know: first black president, first woman, first Italian-American, first Hispanic, first Vietnam War veteran, first Mormon -- for that matter, first Mormon with only one wife and first Roman Catholic who has had three wives.
        By having the field narrowed quickly, a bunch of people could return full time to the offices to which voters (dare we remind everyone) elected them. Others could go back to making fistfuls of dollars making the same speeches they would have delivered gratis on the campaign trail.
        Best of all, voters would be spared the often painful spectacle of candidates -- how to put it? -- evolving as the months wear on.
        To cite a few examples, Mrs. Clinton has evolved on the Iraq resolution that she voted for in 2002. Mr. Giuliani has evolved from absolute solidarity with President Bush on war tactics. Former Gov. Mitt Romney of Massachusetts has evolved on quite a few issues. As for the staunchly conservative Mr. McCain, he has somehow evolved into someone held ideologically suspect by some conservative groups. What does he have to do -- sponsor a bill declaring Torquemada's birthday a national holiday?
        The Mega-etc. primary would efficiently unburden us of candidates who probably didn't stand a chance in the first place.
        And then, free of distractions, we can concentrate on what Americans seem to really care about, like where is Anna Nicole's body, what's the latest on Paris and is Britney in or out of rehab today.
        NYC E-mail: haberman@nytimes.com