New York Label May Not Fit All In Giuliani Run

When Republicans say they are skeptical that Rudolph W. Giuliani, the former mayor of New York, can survive their party's presidential nominating process, they usually point to his record of support for abortion rights, gay rights and gun control.
        But there may be a less obvious hurdle that Mr. Giuliani has to overcome: Whether he is too much of a New Yorker for the rest of the country.
        Americans like New York City, as officials in both parties are quick to say. Most find it vibrant, entertaining and an object of sympathy and pride since the terrorist attacks five and a half years ago that made Mr. Giuliani the national contender he is today.
        But the city, with all its tumult and rough edges, is not for everyone. And few people embody all the complicated facets of New York City as much as Mr. Giuliani.
        He is swaggering, brash and opinionated and loves to stick his thumb in the eye of conventional political norms. Those traits won him some acclaim in New York, not to mention a lot of tabloid headlines. But he can also be temperamental, controlling, capricious, volatile and, in the words of Edward I. Koch, a former Democratic mayor who supported Mr. Giuliani in his successful bid for a second term, ''mean-spirited.''
        New Yorkers who elected him twice as their mayor tend to view what others might call rudeness as an endearing trait. But beyond conservative unease with his positions on social issues, two of the biggest questions about Mr. Giuliani's presidential campaign are whether the same qualities that made him iconic in New York will play as well in the rest of the country, and whether voters elsewhere will exhibit the same tolerance as New Yorkers did toward the more colorful aspects of his character and style.
        ''Being from New York is a very challenging biographical detail for Giuliani,'' said Nelson Warfield, a conservative Republican consultant who worked for Ronald Lauder, Mr. Giuliani's opponent for the Republican mayoral nomination in 1989. ''In Rudy's story, there is chapter after chapter of politics that is accepted as normal in New York, but that is very strange in the rest of the world.''
        Mr. Giuliani's supporters reject such arguments, saying that his role in leading the city after the attacks of Sept. 11 has redrawn his political biography, and that his travel across the country has bleached some of New York City out of his bones. More than that, they say, he has become older and mellower in the aftermath of Sept. 11.
        In many national polls, Mr. Giuliani is now running ahead of Senator John McCain of Arizona, former Gov. Mitt Romney of Massachusetts and the rest of the Republican field, suggesting that voters at this early stage think positively of him even if they know relatively little about him.
        ''I've seen just the opposite -- as Rudy goes and sits in the middle of living rooms and pulls up a barstool and talks to people in the country, most people are fascinated to hear about his success as mayor,''' said Anthony Carbonetti, a senior adviser to Mr. Giuliani.
        Mr. Koch said what he called the ''bad Giuliani'' -- the one who insulted rivals, refused to meet with critics, was ruthless in attacking political enemies -- could not survive the rigors of a primary contest. But he said Mr. Giuliani was disciplined enough that those voters would judge only what he described as the ''good Giuliani,'' the one who has been on display to the public since Sept. 11.
        ''The rest of the country is not going to see Rudy Giuliani at his worst,'' Mr. Koch said. ''Because he's a very smart guy and he can be extremely personable.''
        Still, there is a reason no mayor of New York has been elected president, and it has been nearly 100 years since a born-and-bred New Yorker, Theodore Roosevelt, made it to the White House. The last New York mayor to run for president was John V. Lindsay in 1972, and to say that campaign was short-lived would be to overstate its duration. Mario M. Cuomo, a son of Queens and a former Democratic governor, gave much thought to running for president, but decided not to; there are more than a few similarities between the style and temperament of Mr. Cuomo and Mr. Giuliani.
        And while Hillary Rodham Clinton might be a New York senator, she is a transplanted Illinoisan by way of Arkansas and Washington, D.C., who has never lived in New York City and could hardly be more different temperamentally from Mr. Giuliani.
        The Giuliani tenure at City Hall was, until the attacks of Sept. 11, a blur of a combative mayor fighting with political opponents, civil rights leaders, voters and reporters. (There is tape; voters will hear and see it.) Those who disagreed with him could encounter the kind of scorn one might expect from an irascible New York cabbie. ''There is something deranged about you,'' Mr. Giuliani said in a three-minute lecture to a New Yorker who called in to his weekly radio show to complain about the city's ban on ferrets as pets.
        Some New Yorkers may have winced at the images of Mr. Giuliani shouting a barnyard epithet at a union rally -- or furiously shouting ''quiet!'' to booing supporters at a rally where he was conceding defeat to David N. Dinkins -- but most just accepted it as part of what puts the ''New York'' in the ''the mayor of New York.''
        For New Yorkers, the episode in which Mr. Giuliani announced on television that he was leaving his wife (and his wife responded by insinuating at her own news conference that Mr. Giuliani had been having an affair with his press secretary) was the latest chapter in a rich history of mayors prone to private and public excess.
        So was his post-breakup move into the apartment of a gay couple on the Upper East Side. That inspired an article by The Times of London which recounted how the mayor left for City Hall every morning after giving his two hosts a goodbye peck on the cheek -- ''a little kiss, it's cute,'' Howard Koeppel, one of his hosts, told the newspaper -- and how Mr. Giuliani affectionately called Mr. Koeppel ''mother.''
        (How much more New York can you get?)
        Mr. Giuliani may be a Republican, but a New York Republican is an entirely different breed than, say, one from Arizona. In New York, one can run at once as a Republican Party candidate and a Liberal Party candidate at the same time, which is what Mr. Giuliani did to win election in a Democratic town. He counted among his closest advisers the state's longtime Liberal Party chairman: a chain-smoking, self-acclaimed political boss named Raymond Harding, renowned in New York City political circles for his ability to land all kinds of patronage. (Two of Mr. Harding's sons were on Mr. Giuliani's payroll.)
        And the programs that operated under the huge reach of the government he once ran? ''Republican primary voters are going to learn about the Harvey Milk High School for gay students,'' Mr. Warfield said.
        He continued: ''They are going to learn what the Liberal Party is. I think Giuliani's endorsement of Cuomo will be part of the primary conversation.''
        Merle Black, a political science professor at Emory University in Atlanta, said he wondered if Mr. Giuliani could maintain this even keel through a campaign that promises to be so long and so competitive.
        ''That's the test,'' Mr. Black said. ''He's got to go through two years without reverting to something which might be O.K. in private but it wouldn't be O.K. in Atlanta.''
        POLITICAL MEMO
        Correction:  March 12, 2007, Monday  A Political Memo article on Thursday about the challenges Rudolph W. Giuliani faces in running for president as a former New York City mayor referred incorrectly to the presidency of Theodore Roosevelt, also a New York City mayor. He served more than 100 years ago, from 1901 to 1909; his presidency was not ''almost 100 years ago.'' And although he was indeed the last president born in New York City, he was not the last ''born-and-bred New Yorker'' to make it to the White House. His distant relative, President Franklin D. Roosevelt, was born and raised in Hyde Park, N.Y.
        Correction:  March 13, 2007, Tuesday  A Political Memo article on Thursday, about the challenges Rudolph W. Giuliani faces in running for president as a former New York City mayor, referred incorrectly to the timing of the two-term presidency of another New Yorker, Theodore Roosevelt. He began serving more than 100 years ago, in 1901; his presidency was not ''almost 100 years ago.'' A correction in this space yesterday referred incorrectly to Mr. Roosevelt's time as a public official in New York City. He was a police commissioner, not a former mayor.