The Future President, On Your Friends List

        The Future President, on Your Friends List

HAVING already launched a generation of Gwen Stefani clones and death-metal bands into fleeting Internet fame, MySpace -- the largest social-networking site -- is now setting its sights higher: to help elect the next president of the United States.
        This week, the site will introduce a section dedicated to politics, with an emphasis on the 2008 presidential election. Called the Impact channel, it will be an online version of a town square, a collection of links to political MySpace pages that will make it easier for the site's 60 million American users per month -- many of them from the traditionally elusive and apathetic youth demographic -- to peruse the personal MySpace pages of, so far, 10 presidential candidates.
        The channel will be much like those on the site already devoted to music or video. By clicking into it and on the separate campaign pages, users will be able to read candidate's blogs, view their personal videos and snapshots, and link to other sites that discuss pet issues. Then, theoretically, users will add their favorite candidates to their friends list, and their friends will add them, too. The campaigns will spread virally, in the 2008 campaign strategy of the moment.
        Some observers believe that such efforts by MySpace and other social networking sites might make them influential among voters in 2008. Or, in tech language, such sites aspire to be the killer aps of this election cycle, reminiscent of what talk radio (particularly Rush Limbaugh) was in 1994, when it whipped up enthusiasm for the Republican landslide in the midterm elections, or what MoveOn.org was in 2004 when it emerged as a potent force to raise funds and drum up volunteers for the Democratic Party.
        ''Part of the motivation is seeing how Howard Dean jumped on the blogging trend in 2003 and established that as a powerful force,'' said Lee Rainie, director of the Pew Internet &amp; American Life Project. ''A lot of candidates don't want to miss the boat on what could be the next big thing.''
        Mr. Rainie added: ''There's now a sense in the political establishment and the consultant community that this year feels qualitatively different in the online world. So rather than being tepid in their embrace of it, they're grasping it in a bear hug.''
        Conversely, while other the social networking sites have welcomed their rising political profiles, the move by MySpace (which comScore Media Metrix reports has nearly four times the number of individual users in the United States as Facebook, its closest rival) is the most notable bid so far to establish a presence in the 2008 race.
        From MySpace's perspective, the move is a way to stay competitive within a rapidly evolving environment in which both candidates and rival online companies are making moves to dominate the virtual landscape for the next election.
        Not surprisingly, MySpace executives predict that the site, founded in 2003, can help candidates influence younger swing voters. Some 86 percent of its American users are voting age, and even younger users are on campaign coordinators' radar. ''The election is a little less than two years away,'' said Christian Ferry, the national e-campaign director for John McCain. ''A 16- or 17-year-old today is going to be eligible to vote in 2008.''
        Tom Anderson, 31, a MySpace founder, said, ''MySpace has a method of reaching people who are historically not interested in voting'' and may not read newspapers or watch news on television. He added: ''A MySpace profile could excite their interest in ways they are used to. In the same way they learn about their friends, they could learn about a candidate.''
        The Impact channel will also feature voter registration tools that are intended to function as a cyber version of the Rock the Vote youth drives of recent years. And perhaps most enticing to the campaigns, the site will start a one-click payment function to help contenders solicit campaign contributions. This online tool will appear on each candidate's official MySpace page, and can be easily dragged onto a user's own page. And from there it can be dragged to a user's friend's page, theoretically as easily as MySpace members now swap songs by their favorite bands, said Mr. Anderson and his fellow founder, Chris DeWolfe.
        In the same fashion, they can drag candidate ads onto their own pages -- ''digital yard signs, for lack of a better term,'' Mr. DeWolfe, 41, added.
        An official announcement of the Impact channel will be made on Monday, they said.
        Already, campaigns are showing interest in the potential of the site.
        ''MySpace is definitely one of the tools we'll be using to engage Internet users,'' said Jen Psaki, a spokeswoman for the Barack Obama campaign, ''and we're well aware that young people are the ones who are engaging the campaign through the Internet, more so than other age brackets.''
        Besides Mr. Obama, the Democratic contenders John Edwards, Joseph R. Biden and Dennis J. Kucinich have set up MySpace pages, as have the Republicans Ron Paul, the Texas congressman, and Mr. McCain. In coming weeks, Hillary Rodham Clinton, Rudolph W. Giuliani and Mitt Romney will also launch their official MySpace pages, a MySpace spokeswoman said.
        The candidates were moving onto MySpace even without the lure of the Impact channel, which is expected to be operating Monday.
        Several candidates already have pages posted on competitor sites like Facebook, and many, like Mr. Obama, have campaign staffers aggressively trying to co-opt social networking concepts, like viral marketing, through their own independent Web sites.
        Mr. Edwards, for example, not only announced his candidacy in December on YouTube, and has been blogging away on his own site, Facebook and MySpace ever since. Lately, the former North Carolina senator has even been stumping via avatars on the virtual reality landscape of Second Life.
        In fact, just a few weeks ago, YouTube, which did not exist during the 2004 election cycle, introduced its own campaign-oriented channel on the site, YouChoose '08.
        But the cultural position that MySpace occupies promises to create a curious -- and perhaps potent -- collision of ideologies and stylistic sensibilities. While Facebook got its start as a means to link Harvard students, and to this day maintains an exclusive, clubby feel (that's why many loyal users prefer it to MySpace), MySpace is a colorful, hormone-soaked collage. It has all the graphical elegance of a wall full of graffiti, and members tend to communicate in fluent dude-speak.
        And now the kids are inviting the adults to the party.
        The humorous disconnect has already been noted by Jon Stewart, who last Wednesday ran a satirical segment on ''The Daily Show'' about a hypothetical MySpace page for presidential contender Christopher J. Dodd, the Democratic senator from Connecticut.
        That fictional site was decorated in high MySpace fashion, with colorful unicorn-festooned wallpaper and a highly open friends list that happened to include Richard Ramirez, the convicted Night Stalker killer. The site included the classic MySpace incriminating spring-break-style photos, including an altered one of the senator, in a pinstriped suit, sucking on a beer bong while bikini-clad collegians cheered on.
        ''Oh boy, that's not going to be good,'' joked Mr. Stewart, regarding the photo.
        So far, the real candidate MySpace pages are considerably less vivid.
        The unofficial Hillary Clinton site -- created by a supporter in Seattle but lauded by her campaign representatives -- portrays less-than-spontaneous snapshots, like one of the New York senator posing before Niagara Falls in a gray business suit. In classic MySpace fashion, it lists her ''status'' (married), what she is ''here for'' (networking, friends), and her zodiac sign (Scorpio).
        Like other social networking sites -- which include Facebook, Friendster, Xanga and Tribe -- membership is free with MySpace.
        Anyone, even a future president, can register with the site in minutes, even come up with a cutesy online moniker. The implicit goal for most members is to reach out to as many people as possible and add them to their Friend Space -- which in politics is known as a candidate's base. Friends, who are added by permission only, often do not meet offline, but do readily swap links to favorite songs, videos, jokes and photos.
        This is the much-lauded viral nature of the medium that has managers of presidential campaigns intrigued. In fact, it has already started to yield dividends, according to Peter Daou, the Internet director for the Clinton campaign, even weeks before the senator unveils her official MySpace home page, which will include an empowerment theme aimed at girls and young women called ''I Can Be President.''
        Mr. Daou pointed out that Mrs. Clinton already has spread her message to more than 25,000 ''friends'' on her unofficial MySpace page. (Mr. Obama has more than 64,000 on his official site.)
        Arguably, the push into presidential politics may buy MySpace a bit more time to be relevant in a landscape where every technology seems moments away from obsolescence.
        Already, critics like Michael Hirschorn, in the current issue of The Atlantic Monthly, are pondering what happens when MySpace becomes just another place to find blogging and video upload capability. ''Thanks to the inexorable process of Web innovation,'' Mr. Hirschorn wrote, ''such stuff goes from 'OMG' to 'whatever' in no time flat.''
        The same could be true for the sudden ascendance of social networking in the political process as well, observers said.
        ''Right now, social networking and YouTube are the two most striking things about this election cycle that make it different from 2004 -- so far,'' said Mr. Rainie from the Pew Project.
        ''That could change,'' he said. ''In 10 months, we could be talking about Second Life or text-messaging as 'the next big thing.' ''