Revealing All Before Anyone Else Can

        Revealing All Before Anyone Else Can

WHEN confronted with the prickly question of whether to disclose their illnesses, Presidents Calvin Coolidge, Woodrow Wilson, Franklin D. Roosevelt and John F. Kennedy divined a simple strategy, historians say. They dissembled. They lied. They covered up or simply kept their mouths shut to keep Americans in the dark.
        One can only imagine that those presidents would be rubbing their eyes in disbelief this week.
        Not only at the sight of John Edwards, the North Carolina Democrat and presidential candidate, telling the nation in a news conference that his wife's cancer had returned in an incurable form. But also at the slew of other presidential contenders who are dealing with illness in a decidedly 21st-century fashion.
        Senator Hillary Rodham Clinton, the New York Democrat, regularly discusses her husband's heart surgery in her speeches on the campaign trail. Mitt Romney, the former governor of Massachusetts, and his wife, Ann, appeared this month on CNN's ''Larry King Live'' to discuss her struggles with multiple sclerosis.
        Rudolph W. Giuliani, the former mayor of New York, routinely tells voters about his battle with prostate cancer. And Senator John McCain, the Arizona Republican whose face bears the imprint of his bouts with skin cancer, joked recently that he has ''more scars than Frankenstein.''
        In weighing the age-old question of how to confront serious illness, presidential candidates and their spouses are increasingly opting to come clean. Many are tossing aside traditional notions that have suggested that public airings of such conditions might sink a campaign or derail a presidency.
        Some say the shift reflects the greater freedom candidates have in modern times to portray themselves as more human and vulnerable. Others say the public confessions are driven by a desire to control the political message before reporters do. With Internet bloggers, cable news channels and around-the-clock news cycles, keeping such conditions safely buried in the closet is close to impossible, they say.
        ''These days, given all of the ways that people get their information, you've got to assume there are no secrets,'' said Michael S. Dukakis, whose wife, Kitty, publicly discussed the spinal surgery she underwent during his 1988 presidential campaign as well as her previous addiction to prescription diet pills.
        ''Your life is an open book,'' Mr. Dukakis said. ''You can't hide anything.''
        But political analysts also see something of a tactical calculation here. They say candidates are increasingly humanizing their campaigns to connect more deeply with voters who hunger for more intimate and personal glimpses of their elected leaders.
        ''The public has greater sympathy now for someone in politics who is struggling with health concerns,'' said Robert Dallek, the presidential historian. ''People in this country: they go through divorces, they have their psychological and health problems. They want to see that in their candidates, too.''
        John C. Green, a political analyst at the University of Akron, described Mr. Edwards and his wife, Elizabeth, as courageous for revealing that she had metastatic, or Stage 4, breast cancer, which had spread beyond the breast and lymph nodes to the bone.
        But Mr. Green said the announcement also seemed carefully orchestrated to have ''a positive impact'' on Mr. Edwards' campaign. He noted that the news conference was held at the Carolina Inn, the Chapel Hill resort where the Edwardses had their wedding reception 30 years ago, a symbolic locale that might reinforce the image of a devoted married couple in the minds of voters.
        ''It most certainly made sense for the campaign to address this, but it was also pretty good theatrics,'' said Mr. Green, who heads the Ray C. Bliss Institute of Applied Politics at the University of Akron. ''They did something that was probably necessary but in a positive way for the campaign.''
        In the past, however, presidents and presidential candidates have more often misinformed -- than informed -- the public about their health.
        Mr. Coolidge kept his battle with depression under wraps. White House doctors hid the seriousness of President Wilson's stroke and President Roosevelt's heart condition. President Kennedy denied reports that he had Addison's disease, or adrenal insufficiency, and required hormone injections. President Lyndon B. Johnson chose not to reveal that doctors had removed a basal cell skin cancer, a relatively minor condition, because disclosure would involve the word ''cancer.''
        And the tendency toward secrecy has continued, even in more recent times.
        In 1992, former Senator Paul E. Tsongas of Massachusetts, a Democratic presidential candidate, and his doctors said he had been cured of a lymphoma cancer. In fact, Mr. Tsongas had had a recurrence of the disease and died a day short of what would have been the end of his first term had he been elected.
        Meanwhile, in 2000, Dick Cheney, then the Republican vice-presidential nominee, and his doctors and aides were sharply criticized for failing to promptly tell the public that he had suffered a mild heart attack.
        Even this year's presidential candidates, who speak openly about their illnesses, differ in their comfort levels with the subject. While Mr. Giuliani regularly discusses his cancer at campaign stops, Mr. McCain rarely does so. (Mr. McCain is 70 and is often asked about his health and whether he is too old to be president.)
        Mr. Romney discusses his wife's condition when talking to voters, but typically only when asked, according to his campaign staff. (He has been criticized for opposing stem-cell research, which some believe might eventually lead to a cure for multiple sclerosis.)
        Senator Joseph R. Biden, the Delaware Democrat and presidential candidate, said friends have urged him to talk more about surviving a life-threatening aneurysm nearly two decades ago. He said they believe it would personalize his campaign and show people ''I wasn't born in a blue suit behind a podium.''
        He mentioned his health scare for the first time a few weeks ago, but has hesitated since because it feels too personal. ''I'm a bit uncomfortable,'' Mr. Biden said of the idea. ''I'm still wrestling with it.''
        The Edwardses, who did not have much choice in publicizing their situation, say they have been overwhelmed by the flood of supportive messages since their announcement.
        But such candor may backfire, some warn. Some Democrats believe that Mr. Edwards's decision to continue his presidential bid could pose some risks, particularly should his wife's illness worsen. Political analysts say voters may well conclude that he would be too distracted to hold the presidential office.
        In that regard, Mr. Green pointed out, history offers some cautionary lessons.
        In the 19th century, President Benjamin Harrison's wife, Caroline, died of tuberculosis during his re-election bid. He was accused of being distracted and inattentive to his campaign, which accounted, in part, for the lopsided election result, according to a brief biography of Mr. Harrison compiled by the University of Virginia.
        In 1892, the voters handed the presidency to Mr. Harrison's rival, Grover Cleveland.
        It was the most decisive presidential victory in 20 years.
        THE NATION
        Correction:  April 1, 2007, Sunday  An article last Sunday about the ways in which presidential candidates deal publicly with illness referred incorrectly to the death of former Senator Paul E. Tsongas of Massachusetts, who had lymphoma cancer. He died on Jan. 18, 1997, two days short of what would have been the end of his first term had he been elected president in 1992 -- not one day short. (The error first appeared on Oct. 3, 2004, in an article about the health of Senator John Kerry.)