The Money Race

        The Money Race

With the first quarter of the year ending tomorrow, presidential campaigns are preparing to release their fund-raising tallies on April 15. A look at fund-raising efforts by a few of the leading candidates.
        JEFF ZELENY
        THE DEMOCRATS
        Senator Hillary Rodham Clinton  With $11 million transferred from her Senate re-election account, the campaign has myriad advantages. The fund-raising list is among the biggest in the party, providing a wide reach to Democratic households across America. Emily's List, a political action committee that raised $45 million last year to elect female candidates, is working on Mrs. Clinton's behalf. Bill Clinton has tirelessly raised money, too, expanding the campaign's reach.
        John Edwards  As the only candidate in the race who ran for president in 2004, his campaign's fund-raising list remains fresh, but it remains an open question whether his network of trial lawyers will come through as it did four years ago and if he can expand his appeal to avoid falling off in the second quarter. Unlike many others in the field, he can hold fund-raisers without the shackle of the Senate schedule. Will sympathy toward his wife, Elizabeth's, cancer inspire more contributions?
        Senator Barack Obama  The political equivalent of a popular start-up company, fund-raising events were held across the country for as low as $25 per ticket. The idea is to sign up a new generation of supporters as long-term investors, who could spread the word and keep their contributions coming. A strong grass-roots appeal has developed on the Internet, even while picking off a few former Clinton administration officials and firing up a network of fellow Harvard lawyers.
        THE REPUBLICANS
        Rudolph W. Giuliani  The former New York mayor has sought to keep his fund-raising activities well below the radar, but last week he held events almost every day and expects to have held 57 by the end of the quarter tomorrow night. He has a built-in advantage with New York money and contacts from his two terms as mayor, but is vigorously working to expand his appeal. He starts from scratch, with no federal account to transfer to his presidential account.
        Senator John McCain  With a fund-raising engine propelled by many of the same forces who financed both campaigns of President Bush, the campaign has been raising money since opening an exploratory committee on Nov. 16. After delaying an official announcement of his presidential campaign, in part to conserve money, Mr. McCain has recently sought to play down its first-quarter standing. Among his techniques: turning public forums into fund-raisers.
        Mitt Romney  Of all the contributions to his campaign, three sources stand out as distinct: Mormons, Massachusetts and Mr. Romney's connections in the business world from his corporate days. The former Massachusetts governor kicked off his campaign with a fund-raising telethon and has recently encouraged young entrepreneurs to raise money for his campaign. If they find success, 10 percent of the money goes into their pockets.  HEADING TOWARD 2008