IDEAS &amp; TRENDS: The Early Birds; About That Political Traffic Jam in Iowa

        About That Political Traffic Jam in Iowa

REMEMBER all the clatter about Iowa losing some of its oversize influence in the presidential race? Kindly disregard.
        For all the tinkering with the 2008 primary schedule, for all the attempts by nearly 20 states to have a greater say in picking the nominee, an unusually early swarm of campaign visits here underscores which state -- for now, at least -- is one of the top priorities. A new route may exist on the road to the White House, but no candidates are daring to discount the familiar path of Iowa. In fact, the state has almost certainly become more influential.
        In the last week or so alone, the field of Republican and Democratic hopefuls staged more than 50 public events across Iowa. They opened offices, welcomed hundreds of new staffers and made scores of calls to local political dignitaries, just letting them know they were in the neighborhood.
        Senator Hillary Rodham Clinton began her Four Corners of Iowa Tour as the sun was setting the other night on a farm outside Fort Madison, in southeastern Iowa. (Yes, she promised to return soon and tackle the other three.)
        Senator Barack Obama, who had just traveled the state's western edge, was back again, this time chugging through northern Iowa. (Yes, that was him sitting in the bowling alley in the town of Ida Grove, catching the end of a Final Four college basketball game last Saturday night.)
        And Rudolph W. Giuliani made his Iowa debut. (Yes, he vowed to compete here, saying: ''I'm going to run in Iowa the way I ran in New York City.'')
        The momentum gained by a strong finish in Iowa is, according to the candidates' current thinking, simply irreplaceable. Try as they might, campaign strategists say, they fear they will not be able to chart a reliable course for winning the nomination without Iowa.
        Here's why: Bypassing Iowa -- and its traditional early-voting partner, New Hampshire -- means that a campaign would have to brave most of the month of January without a raft of free publicity, which comes through endless news coverage.
        Ordinarily, it might be worth the risk. But with California, Texas, New York and Illinois among the states looking to set their own primaries in early February, immediately after the first round, the luxury of gaining traction slowly and steadily between contests is gone. (Even Senator John McCain, who thumbed his nose at the ritual of Iowa eight years ago, finds himself as invested in the state today as any candidate.)
        Iowa is tentatively scheduled to hold its caucuses on Jan. 20, followed by Nevada, New Hampshire and South Carolina. But the calendar won't be settled until later this year and could be upended if New Hampshire follows through with a threat to shift its primary earlier than Jan. 27. (Note to candidates: Don't make plans for December 2007. New Hampshire's secretary of state, William Gardner, could spoil your holiday by calling an early election.)
        The realignment of the political calendar -- if last week's schedule is any guide -- has cranked the political thermostat in Iowa higher than ever this far in advance of the election.
        Eight years ago, the presidential campaign was barely purring along in early April. George W. Bush? He had yet to step foot in the state.
        ''We're seeing an unprecedented number of candidates come through this state,'' Iowa's governor, Chet Culver, said in an interview. ''We are giving them a chance to meet the voters, take tough questions and share their vision for the future of the country with people who care passionately about the presidential selection process.''
        That is precisely the kind of attention that California's governor, Arnold Schwarzenegger, had in mind when he signed legislation to advance the date of his state's primary. But fund-raising aside, campaign officials say it would be malpractice to focus more than a sliver of their attention right now on California and other states considering a Feb. 5 primary date. The time will come, they said, but only for those who do well in the opening chapters of the campaign or have stockpiled enough money to stay in.
        The political dance in Iowa, with the wide-open field on both sides of the ticket, has a far different feel than the contest of 2004. The Des Moines Register, the state's largest daily, is so stuffed with political coverage, it can seem as though January has already arrived.
        With the first quarter of fund-raising behind them and a Congressional recess in Washington, a dozen candidates made appearances in every quadrant of the state, from the Missouri River in the west to the Mississippi River in the east, from the Missouri border on the south to the Minnesota border on the north.
        Long-shot candidates came, hoping to catch an Iowa tail wind, as Jimmy Carter did in 1976. (He did not win the caucuses, mind you, but came in second -- after ''uncommitted.'')
        Tom Tancredo, a Republican congressman from Colorado, formally declared his presidential candidacy here the other morning. He made his pitch during the first hour of the ''Mickelson in the Morning'' talk-radio show on WHO-AM in Des Moines. After the commercial break, Senator Joseph R. Biden, Democrat of Delaware, slid into the studio to take his turn.
        A former Wisconsin governor, Tommy Thompson, who has been acquainting himself with Iowa Republicans on many weekend trips this year, held his first rally as an official candidate. Senator Christopher J. Dodd, Democrat of Connecticut, has secured prominent real estate for his headquarters along Grand Avenue in Des Moines. And John Edwards conducted back-to-back-to-back live TV interviews the other night with each station in the state capital.
        It would be foolhardy to place much stock in polls at this early date, but the few polls taken so far argue that Mr. Edwards, the only major candidate who competed four years ago, holds an early edge among Democratic caucus goers. (He is, after all, perhaps the only candidate who can often call voters by name.)
        As for the Republicans? It is anyone's guess. But voters warn out-of-town reporters not to count out candidates like Senator Sam Brownback of Kansas, a conservative who appeared at two prayer breakfasts in as many days here last week.
        Take a listen to nearly all the candidates and it becomes clear that they are becoming well-practiced in their flattery of Iowa. (''We have a lot of farms in New York,'' Mrs. Clinton told her audience at a picnic in Fort Madison. ''Do you all know that? It's true. I know nobody believes that, but I tell everybody that.'')
        And, of course, in nearly every trip to the state, most candidates pause long enough to pledge their allegiance to the Iowa caucuses. ''There's nothing that can compare with the one-on-one meetings that you have with the people of Iowa,'' Mitt Romney, the former Massachusetts governor who is seeking the Republican presidential nomination, told reporters at the Iowa Statehouse.
        As campaigns pencil in their schedules for the second quarter of the year, strategists for candidates in both parties say that travel to Iowa and New Hampshire is likely to consume about half of their days on the road. That's not to say campaign planes won't be heading to California, Florida, New York, Texas and other states considering an earlier primary next year.
        But those trips, at least the public campaign events, are likely to be swift.
        Take, for example, a trip Mr. Giuliani took on a recent day to meet voters in Oakland, Calif., where he logged a 24-minute visit, according to the stopwatch of the veteran political writer Carla Marinucci of The San Francisco Chronicle, who described the appearance as ''lightning-quick.''
        In Iowa last week, he lingered for the better part of a day.
        The Early Birds