Early '08 Fund-Raising Has Clear Blue Tint

For anyone looking for a sign of the health of the Democratic Party going into the 2008 presidential campaign, it came Wednesday with the last of the fund-raising figures reported by the major presidential candidates.
        With the $25 million reported by Senator Barack Obama's campaign, closing in on Senator Hillary Rodham Clinton's $26 million, the Democratic presidential candidates collectively outperformed the Republicans, and by a substantial amount: Democrats raised a total of about $78 million, compared with just over $51 million by their rivals, according to preliminary first-quarter figures provided by the campaigns.
        That is remarkable because Republicans have historically proved better at collecting contributions. In every presidential primary season since 1976, the top fund-raiser was a Republican.
        The new numbers offered what even Republicans described as measurable evidence that Democrats today are more confident about their prospects of winning back the White House, and -- not typically for their party -- satisfied with their candidates. That enthusiasm gap is emerging as one of the early dynamics of the 2008 campaign.
        ''The Democrats seem to have a lot more hunger for the White House right now than we do,'' said Scott Reed, who managed the presidential campaign of Bob Dole, a Kansas Republican, in 1996. ''Part of it on the Republican side may be Bush fatigue. But clearly, the Republicans are going to need to get it together on finances if we are going to compete with the likes of Obama or Hillary Clinton. It's a concern.''
        Officials of both parties as well as independent analysts said the figures quantified a trend apparent here and in New Hampshire, where Democratic presidential candidates consistently draw crowds at rallies and house parties.
        ''This reflects on the part of Democrats not only their view of the prospects of victory in 2008, but also how they are coming off this rush of the 2006 elections,'' said Costas Panagopoulos, a political science professor at Fordham University. ''In terms of Republican candidates, voters are feeling like they have to choose from a list of who represents the least of all evils.''
        The initial Democratic fund-raising advantage seems to be the next step in a shift that began in 2004, when Democratic presidential candidates, starting with Howard Dean, tapped into the Internet to collect money from first-time contributors. It continued in the 2006 midterm elections when Democratic Congressional campaign committees matched or beat their Republican counterparts, helping Democrats to take control of Congress.
        ''This is the continuation of a trend of an energized and engaged Democratic base that I think both Obama and Clinton are tapping into and that other Democrats, at the Congressional and local levels, are going to be able to tap into,'' said David B. Magleby, a political science professor at Brigham Young University.
        If there is a bright side here for Republicans, it is that Democrats, particularly Mr. Obama and Mrs. Clinton, have enough money to inflict a considerable amount of damage on their fellow Democrats in the nine months before they settle in here for the Iowa caucuses that lead off the primary voting.
        And it is still many financial quarters before the general election. Even Democrats who described themselves as delighted by the results said they had no doubt that the Republican nominee will have more than enough money to compete in the general election.
        ''I don't think the Republicans are going to lose the presidential election next year because of a lack of money,'' said David Plouffe, the manager of Mr. Obama's campaign. ''But the Republican might have to, oddly enough, work harder for it.''
        Still, that may prove to be small comfort. The Republican who had been viewed as his party's leading candidate, Senator John McCain of Arizona, raised about half what Mrs. Clinton and Mr. Obama reported raising, and trailed even the $14 million raised by John Edwards, the North Carolina Democrat making his second bid for president.
        Steve Grossman, who was chairman of Mr. Dean's campaign and is supporting Mrs. Clinton, said Wednesday that he was struck by the size of the change, recalling that Mr. Dean had raised $50 million for his entire campaign. ''You had two Democrats who raised $50 million between them for the first quarter of '07,'' Mr. Grossman said.
        Beyond that, the Republican's top fund-raiser, Mitt Romney of Massachusetts, has trailed in national polls partly because he is not widely known, but also because he has been repeatedly attacked in his own party as changing positions on central issues, like abortion and gay rights.
        In this unsettled environment it is no surprise that this year, the Republicans, not the Democrats, seem hungry to find someone else to get into the race, as reflected by the interest drawn by the potential candidacies of the unrelated Thompsons: Fred of Tennessee and Tommy of Wisconsin.
        And the release of these figures has offered a statistical basis to support anecdotal evidence that Democrats are more optimistic about winning the White House.
        Democrats as a rule have been drawing much bigger crowds than Republicans. By contrast, Republicans show few signs of pulling out of the doldrums that followed their defeat in the November election. Mr. Reed, the former Dole adviser, suggested that that, combined with opposition to the war and Mr. Bush's low popularity ratings, was sapping the energy of voters in his party.
        The Democrats' figures left no question that Mrs. Clinton faces a fund-raising equal in Mr. Obama. Any confidence that she or her supporters had expressed about an easy march to the nomination was erased when Mr. Obama posted his numbers on The Chicago Tribune Web site. At the same time, Mr. Edwards trailed significantly behind Mrs. Clinton and Mr. Obama, evidence of just how important it will be for him to score an early win here before the race moves to the broad and expensive national field of the Feb. 5 primaries.
        The news might be worse in the so-called second Democratic tier. Senators Joseph R. Biden Jr. of Delaware and Christopher J. Dodd of Connecticut both struggled to raise money, despite their credentials and networks, which might prove troublesome for them as they seek continued support.
        As no less an expert than Mr. Dean learned, this kind of fund-raising success, even when it draws new people into the process, does not automatically turn into voter support.
        Mr. Magleby, of Brigham Young, said he suspected Republicans were suffering from donor fatigue. In the quarters to come, the prospect of another President Clinton could certainly get Republicans to take out their checkbooks.
        Yet as the numbers were tallied and Republicans found themselves staring at a $27 million gap, it was clear that the disparity between the two parties this spring was about more than money.
        NEWS ANALYSIS