ON THE CAMPAIGN: Polling Early and Often

Mitt Romney's campaign fired off an announcement last week, trumpeting a new poll that found Mr. Romney had taken the lead among Republican presidential candidates in New Hampshire. ''Zogby: Romney Rockets!'' it said.
        Election day is 19 months away. No matter. The 2008 campaign cycle has been distinguished by a blizzard of polls, being conducted by news organizations and independent (and not-so-independent) groups. They are providing a near-daily measure of who is up and down in the Democratic and Republican primaries and even offering hypothetical match-ups for the general election.
        ''There is like a poll every day: I've never seen anything like it,'' said Mark Penn, a pollster who is the chief strategist for the presidential campaign of Senator Hillary Rodham Clinton. ''I joke about it: 'We have four polls today!'''
        Polls can be problematic for candidates as they struggle to convince the world that, based on the latest blip or swing in a poll, their campaigns are not collapsing. (Ask Senator John McCain of Arizona about that today). But polls do have their uses for resourceful campaigns which have been quietly seeking to take advantage of this new environment.
        The Clinton campaign made an early decision this year to spotlight--in the form of a regular patter of news releases from her war room any poll that showed her ahead. That is something that some campaigns, particularly those of presumed front-runners, often avoid, because it makes it harder to knock down any poll that comes along later that shows you in trouble. (This is known as the live-by-the-poll, die-by-the-poll rule of politics).
        In this case, Mrs. Clinton's advisers decided it was worth the risk. They determined (yes, after doing some polling), that her biggest obstacle to winning the nomination was the perception among Democratic primary voters that she could not win. Erasing concerns about her electability by displaying evidence that she was a winner, the thinking went, would go a long way to getting her elected.
        For all the candidates, the poll numbers can be like the first-quarter fundraising numbers the campaigns released last week: validators for all the candidates as they shout for a moment of attention from the press, from contributors, from party leaders in these extremely crowded fields.
        In Mr. Romney's case, his continued low numbers in the polls as meaningless as that is right now clearly was irking people at his campaign headquarters in Boston. Mr. McCain's aides had taken to poking fun at his anemic poll standing; more than that, it had to be humiliating for Mr. Romney, who is from Massachusetts, to be trailing Mr. McCain and Mr. Giuliani in his own backyard, New Hampshire. The announcement of the New Hampshire poll read like the e-mail equivalent of a sigh of relief.
        Campaigns rely primarily on their own internal polling to help understand and track public impressions of their own candidates, their opponents and the issues. But public polls even at this early stage, if of dubious quality when it comes to measuring the pure horserace, can offer telling information about the form and direction of the race as well.
        Mr. McCain must be tracking voter attitudes about the war in Iraq as he prepares to give a speech Wednesday arguing that President Bush's policies in Iraq are working. The intensity of concern among voters about issues like health care can shape the substance of the messages that candidates place before the public. Candidates carefully track areas of strength and vulnerability; political strategists say they are watching Senator Barack Obama's standing among African-American voters, and Mrs. Clinton's among women.
        ''Voters are a long way from finally deciding that doesn't mean it doesn't matter where they are today,'' Mr. Penn said.
        Yet most pollsters themselves will tell you that as a matter of actually predicting how people will vote presumably what these surveys are intended to do the polls are suspect, particularly in a year with so many candidates and no obvious front-runner.
        Historically, they have been wide off the mark when it comes to Democrats; they have more accurate for Republicans, but there really hasn't been a Republican contest like this one with the party's presumed front-runner, Mr. McCain, struggling so early -- in a long time.
        Voters are being asked to give opinions about candidates who in most if not all cases they do not really know. A national poll is not going to tell you who is going to win the Democratic nomination; the parties don't chose their candidates in national elections. Polls in influential early-voting states like Iowa are particularly unreliable. Trying to divine the winners of hypothetical general election match-ups now is, with all due respect to the news organizations shelling out money to pose those kind of questions, the polling equivalent of a parlor game.
        Consider this: as late as December 2003, Howard Dean was being treated as the all-but-certain Democratic nominee, reflected in many polls. His collapse in Iowa began shortly after Jan. 1 when, the holiday season over, most voters began to really begin to examine the credentials of the Democratic field. That is a lesson worth remembering these days.
        ''There's value to understanding who the voters are, what they are thinking, whatever,'' Mr. Penn said. ''It's another thing to use these polls for transient headlines,'' he said. ''There's polling abuse out there.''