South Carolina, and a Fish Fry, Gain Political Heft on '08 Path

Seldom has a slice of white bread and a piece of fried fish carried such weighty significance in American politics.
        A day after appearing at the first presidential debate of the year, the field of Democratic hopefuls descended Friday evening on a different South Carolina stage: Representative James E. Clyburn's fish fry. It is an annual event that candidates view as an essential ingredient in courting voters here, a critical stop on the road to the primary.
        While Iowa and New Hampshire have long played their traditional roles in opening the presidential campaign season, the South Carolina primary, set for Jan. 29, is emerging as a near equal, a last-chance stop for candidates to demonstrate their strength before being thrust into the coast-to-coast battery of early primaries on Feb. 5.
        Although it was the Democrats on display here Friday evening at the fish fry, Republican presidential candidates have been no less visible in South Carolina, testimony to the fact that the primary here is shaping up as a pivotal event on both presidential nomination tracks. Senator John McCain, Republican of Arizona, visited this week to announce his candidacy, and Republicans are coming next month for their own debate.
        ''It will have more importance than ever,'' said Mr. Clyburn, who is one of the state's most influential politicians, not to mention the No. 3 Democrat in the House. ''This is really the place where almost anything could happen.''
        The South Carolina primary also presents the first significant opportunity for candidates in either party to test how their messages appeal to black voters and Southern constituencies.
        It will provide the first clues to these and other questions: Will Bill Clinton's popularity among black voters help Senator Hillary Rodham Clinton, or will Senator Barack Obama's quest to be the first black president have greater resonance? Can Democrats balance their opposition to the Iraq war with a national security message in a state heavily influenced by the military? And which Democrat, if any, has a shot at capturing Southern support in the general election?
        ''All of these candidates see South Carolina as a place where they can jump out and surprise some people,'' said Joe Erwin, the chairman of the State Democratic Party. ''This is so new to people here; it's not like Iowa and new Hampshire where it is so embedded.''
        So the Democratic contenders fanned out Friday, campaigning from Greenville to Charleston. But nearly all made certain they were back in the capital before nightfall to attend the Clyburn fish fry.
        ''I have been all over the world, I've been to all kinds of political events,'' Mrs. Clinton said, her voice fading as she screamed over the crowd. ''I can honestly say I've never seen anything like Jim Clyburn's fish fry in the world.''
        The event, part carnival and part buffet with 120 loaves of bread and 1,200 pounds of whiting, spilled out of the ground floor of a parking garage on Gervais Street in downtown Columbia. John Edwards of North Carolina hired a high school drum line to escort him into the show, while Senator Christopher J. Dodd of Connecticut exclaimed, ''We're coming back to South Carolina!''
        The political purpose is clear: few candidates dare to miss it, considering they are working to win Mr. Clyburn's endorsement. (No, he said, he has not decided whether he will issue one this year, but he beamed as he stood alongside the candidates on a crowded stage.)
        Mr. Clyburn has held the fish fry since 1992. Why? He wants the candidates to mingle with people who do not typically attend political events. He wants them to dance, to eat, even to drink a can of beer.
        This year's crowd was so unwieldy that most of the candidates left long before the Electric Slide began, a sure disappointment to the crush of photographers who had visions of capturing them dancing. (Who, after all, could forget Representative Richard A. Gephardt of Missouri showing his moves four years ago?)
        But the candidates vowed to be back, including Gov. Bill Richardson of New Mexico, who bluntly declared that his candidacy depended on South Carolina, saying, ''It's going to be hard to win here, but I need to be in the top three or I'm out.''
        Activity on the Republican side is no less intense, in no small part because of the vivid memories of 2000, when George W. Bush's victory here stopped the momentum Mr. McCain had coming out of his victory in the New Hampshire primary.
        Mr. McCain came here from New Hampshire this week to formally announce his presidency in what he described as testimony to the importance he attaches to winning this state to capture his party's nomination. He arrived to find evidence of the fight on his hands: Signs for Mitt Romney, the former governor of Massachusetts, were plastered on light poles in Greenville, where he announced his candidacy in front of a thin crowd on a beautiful morning.
        This time around, Mr. McCain seems intent not to replicate his past defeat here.
        He told reporters that he thought the main reason he lost in 2000 was because Mr. Bush had assembled a superior network of South Carolina supporters, and he said he had made sure to do the same this time. Chief among them is Senator Lindsey Graham -- ''the most popular official in South Carolina,'' Mr. McCain called him in Greenville -- who accompanies Mr. McCain around the state.
        As Mr. McCain knows better than his fellow candidates from either party, the South Carolina primary has unique local issues that can overshadow a campaign.
        Take, for example, the controversy over the Confederate battle flag, which has not gone away since it plagued him seven years ago when he first said flying the flag was a state issue, then reversed himself. Just this month, Steve Spurrier, the University of South Carolina football coach, called for the flag to be removed from the Statehouse grounds.
        Mr. McCain said he did not think the dispute over the flag would trouble his campaign this time, saying, ''That's behind us.'' But he received several reminders that it was not. On his way to a rally at a flour-processing plant in Columbia, he drove past more than one Confederate flag fluttering in the wind.
        At the Democratic debate, Mr. Obama was asked whether he agreed with the N.A.A.C.P.'s asking tourist groups and sporting events to stay out of South Carolina until the flag was removed from the front of the Capitol.
        ''I think that the Confederate flag should be put in a museum,'' Mr. Obama said. ''That's where it belongs.''
        He changed the subject, though, before saying whether he agreed with the boycott.