In G.O.P. Debate Today, Which Tack for Giuliani?

Which Rudolph W. Giuliani will show up tonight in California for the debate among 10 Republican presidential candidates? The hard-hitting prosecutor? Or Mr. Nice Guy?
        Mr. Giuliani has played both in his short debate history. Now, with polls showing him as the front-runner of the Republican field, his performance may well be the most-watched tonight. But it has been a decade since Mr. Giuliani last debated as a political candidate, and his two closest challengers, Senator John McCain of Arizona and former Gov. Mitt Romney of Massachusetts, have more recent experience.
        Mr. McCain has actually been in a presidential debate. That was in the 2000 primaries against George W. Bush. Mr. McCain, who was reluctant to participate, joined in at the last minute by satellite hookup. It was not a high point for either candidate as they sniped at each other over religion and politics.
        Mr. Romney has participated in debates in his races for the Senate in 1994 and for governor in 2002. His 1994 debate, against Senator Edward M. Kennedy, a Democrat, has become a big hit on YouTube.com because it shows him supporting abortion rights and gay rights, which are positions he does not hold now.
        Mr. Giuliani's debate history is encapsulated in a relatively brief period, from 1989 to 1997, all when he was running for mayor of New York.
        With his background as a trial lawyer and a United States attorney, Mr. Giuliani burst onto the public stage as a tough, crime-busting prosecutor. He started out as an aggressive debater, prone to attacking his opponent, according to a review of transcripts of his debates. But voters found him mean-spirited, and he eventually adopted a softer, more-controlled tone, at least in his debates, especially when he was ahead in the polls.
        In his first debate, in September 1989, when he was trying to win the Republican primary for mayor, Mr. Giuliani came out swinging. He and his opponent, Ronald S. Lauder, sparred over who was the real Republican, in part because Mr. Giuliani was also running as the Liberal Party nominee.
        At one point, Mr. Giuliani accused Mr. Lauder of not having written a book that bore his name, calling it ''a book you probably didn't read because somebody else wrote it for you.'' The New York Times called the debate ''one of the most vituperative encounters of the campaign.''
        Mr. Giuliani won the primary and went on to face Mayor David N. Dinkins, a Democrat, in the general election. In the first of two debates, Mr. Giuliani foreshadowed a line of attack he has revived today: that victory by his opponent would spell ruin.
        ''If we keep going merrily along, this city's going down,'' Mr. Giuliani warned in the 1989 debate, suggesting that the Democrats were not tough enough on crime. The comment was similar to one Mr. Giuliani made last month in New Hampshire, when he said that any Republican elected president would try to stop terrorist attacks, implying that any Democrat would not.
        In their second, more free-wheeling debate, Mr. Dinkins picked up a familiar refrain against Mr. Giuliani, saying that New York needed ''a mayor, not a prosecutor.'' Mr. Giuliani shot back that voters wanted ''a mayor who has nothing to fear from a prosecutor.'' (Questions were swirling around Mr. Dinkins at the time for selling stock in a communications company to his son for much less than it was valued.)
        Mr. Giuliani added later that New Yorkers considered Mr. Dinkins as ''more of the same, more of the rotten politics that have been dragging us down.''
        Mr. Dinkins won that election in 1989 by two percentage points. But Mr. Giuliani came back for a rematch four years later and won. In a ferocious test of wills, the two candidates managed to avoid any debates, for the first time in more than three decades of mayoral campaigns.
        The stalemate developed because Mr. Dinkins wanted a third-party candidate to share the stage and Mr. Giuliani did not. Mr. Giuliani and Mr. Dinkins had been so obstinate about holding debates on their own terms that Newsday portrayed them as two infants in baby bunting with the headline, ''Two Big Babies.''
        After he became mayor in 1993, Mr. Giuliani participated in two more debates, both against Ruth W. Messinger, a Democrat, as he sought, and won, re-election in 1997.
        In the first, Mr. Giuliani resurrected his theme that bad times could return to plague the city if Democrats retook City Hall.
        But he was comfortably ahead in the polls and largely followed his counselors' advice to hold himself in check. The polls that showed him ahead also showed that voters thought he did not have a ''likable personality.'' So he smiled, he took notes, he shrugged off attacks.
        In their final debate, Mr. Giuliani was so pleasant that Ms. Messinger took note: ''We're certainly seeing the nice Rudy Giuliani tonight.''
        But she said he was really a bully. ''His natural instinct and style is to bully, to divide, to throw religious differences into the middle of a political campaign,'' Ms. Messinger said.
        Mr. Giuliani responded: ''Why am I a bully? I'm very passionate about the job that I do as mayor. I expect very, very high performance out of people. Sometimes I get impatient when things aren't happening fast enough.''
        ''I think I'm a pretty nice guy,'' he said, to laughter, in conclusion.
        In 2000, when Mr. Giuliani was running for the Senate, the political world was anticipating a historic confrontation between him and the Democratic nominee, Hillary Rodham Clinton. But he dropped out of the race before they could meet on stage.
        If each wins their party's presidential primary, Mr. Giuliani and Mrs. Clinton could get that chance to debate each other after all.
        Correction:  May 5, 2007, Saturday  An article on Thursday about the tone Rudolph W. Giuliani has taken in political debates misstated the year he became mayor of New York. It was 1994, not 1993.