The Basics; Just 18 Short Months to Go

This early on, the 2008 presidential race has so many unknown candidates it has dark horseflies on its dark horses. But maybe you're among the fully one-quarter of Americans who, in a CBS News poll last month, said they were actually paying a lot of attention to this stuff. If so, the quiz below should be a snap. Right?
        TOM KUNTZ
        1. Here are the lower-tier Republican presidential hopefuls. Match names with faces:
        Senator Sam Brownback of Kansas  John H. Cox, Chicago businessman  Former Gov. Jim Gilmore of Virginia  Rep. Duncan Hunter of California  Former Gov. Tommy Thompson of Wisconsin  Former Gov. Mike Huckabee of Arkansas  Rep. Ron Paul of Texas  Rep. Tom Tancredo of Colorado
        (One point for each correct match -- potential 8 points.)
        2. A lot of people know that Mitt Romney, the Republican who was governor of Massachusetts, is a Mormon, but did you know that six candidates are Roman Catholic? Who from the list below isn't?
        A. Senator Christopher J. Dodd, Democrat of Connecticut  B. Former Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani of New York  C. Former Senator Mike Gravel, Democrat of Alaska  D. Gov. Bill Richardson, Democrat of New Mexico  E. Tommy Thompson  F. Brownback  G. Cox
        (Correct answer: 3 points)
        3. Who has been least associated with presidential politics?
        A. Paul Tsongas  B. Ron Paul  C. Pat Paulsen  D. RuPaul
        (Correct answer: 1 point)
        4. Match the potential health risk with the politician: Senator Barack Obama, Democrat of Illinois; Fred Thompson former Republican senator of Tennessee; Giuliani; Huckabee.
        A. Non-Hodgkin's lymphoma  B. Adult-onset diabetes  C. Prostate cancer  D. Past smoking
        (One point for each correct match -- potential 4 points)
        5. Match the eyebrow-raising quote with the speaker: Tommy Thompson, Obama, Giuliani, Romney and Yosemite Sam.
        A. ''Freedom is about authority. Freedom is about the willingness of every single human being to cede to lawful authority a great deal of discretion about what you do.''  B. ''I'm in the private sector and for the first time in my life I'm earning money. You know, that's sort of part of the Jewish tradition.''  C. ''In case you missed it, this week, there was a tragedy in Kansas. Ten thousand people died, an entire town destroyed.''  D. ''I'm not a big-game hunter. I've made that very clear. I've always been a rodent and rabbit hunter. Small varmints, if you will.''  E. ''Ya better say yer prayers, ya flea-bitten varmint! I'm a-gonna blow ya to smithereenies!''
        (One point for each correct match -- potential 5 points)
        6. Match the politician -- Tommy Thompson, Tancredo, Paul, Gravel -- with the descriptive phrase found on his official Web site:
        A. ''No amnesty for illegal immigrants''  B. The ''one exception to the Gang of 535'' on Capitol Hill  C. ''The reliable conservative''  D. ''More like Cicero than Quixote''
        (One point for each correct match -- potential 4 points)
        7. Pomp my Ride. Match the candidates with how they say they roll:
        Senator Hillary Rodham Clinton, Democrat of New York  Former Senator John Edwards, Democrat of North Carolina  Senator John McCain, Republican of Arizona  Rep. Dennis Kucinich, Democrat of Ohio  Giuliani  Obama  Dodd  Romney
        A. 2005 Ford Mustang convertible  B. ''For security reasons, we drive in Secret Service vehicles but the Service lets us use a Ford hybrid when we're home...''  C. Ford Escape hybrid, a compact S.U.V.  D. Chrysler 300C, a full-size sport-luxury sedan  E. ''I don't drive, I navigate.''  F. Cadillac CTS, a midsize luxury sedan  G. Ford Focus compact
        (One point for each correct match: potential 8 points)
        8. Fred Thompson? Tommy Thompson? What's the diff?
        A. Fred hasn't declared candidacy.  B. Fred, from Tennessee, has a better southern drawl than Hillary Clinton.  C. Tommy advocates trimming welfare more than John Edwards.  D. Fred spends a lot less money on a trim than John Edwards.  E. All of the above, probably
        (Correct answer: one point)
        Answers: 1) Brownback, G; Cox, H; Gilmore, F; Hunter, A; Thompson, D; Huckabee, E; Paul, C; Tancredo, B; 2) C; 3) D; 4) Obama, D; Thompson, A; Giuliani, C; Huckabee, B; 5) Thompson, B; Obama, C; Giuliani, A; Romney, D; Yosemite Sam, E; 6) Thompson, C; Tancredo, A; Paul, B; Gravel, D; 7) Clinton, B; Edwards, C; McCain, F; Kucinich, G; Giuliani, E; Obama, D; Dodd, C; Romney, A; 8) E
        There are a total of 34 possible points. If your score -- or political-obscurity quotient (P.O.Q.) -- is:
        0-9 You never miss an episode of ''Judge Judy.''  10-18 You have heeded John McCain's admonition to ''Get a life,'' and may actually know who he is.  19-27 You are a C-Span caller with the TV volume up too loud.  28-34 You are a model citizen, political pro or someone with entirely too much time on your hands.