Terror Attack Scenario Exposes Deep Differences Among G.O.P. Hopefuls

The scenario presented to the 10 Republican presidential candidates was chilling: Three American shopping malls had been bombed, producing scores of casualties. Terrorists with detailed knowledge of another imminent and deadlier attack had been captured and taken to Guantánamo Bay, Cuba.
        The question: How far can the authorities go in interrogating the terrorists to get information to avert a fourth attack?
        The answers exposed clear differences among the three leading candidates in a debate last night that amounted to the first direct engagement of the Republican presidential campaign and showed them all maneuvering to emphasize their credentials on national security and as reliable conservatives.
        Senator John McCain of Arizona, a prisoner of war in Vietnam, said he would not resort to torture because the United States would lose more in world opinion than it would gain in information.
        ''When I was in Vietnam, one of the things that sustained us, as we went -- underwent torture ourselves -- is the knowledge that if we had our positions reversed and we were the captors, we would not impose that kind of treatment on them,'' Mr. McCain said. ''It's not about the terrorists, it's about us. It's about what kind of country we are.''
        Former Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani of New York said he would back ''every method'' short of torture that interrogators could think of because ''I don't want to see another 3,000 people dead in New York or any place else.''
        Former Gov. Mitt Romney of Massachusetts said he would support ''not torture but enhanced interrogation techniques. And taking a tougher line than President Bush and Mr. McCain, who have said they would like to shut down the detention center at Guantánamo Bay, Mr. Romney said he wanted the facility doubled in size.
        The session, sponsored by Fox News and the South Carolina Republican Party at the University of South Carolina in Columbia, was the second debate for this field of candidates. It was a far more free-wheeling, and revealing, session than their meeting 12 days ago in Simi Valley, Calif.
        Appearing before a boisterous and decidedly conservative crowd, the candidates answered repeated questions about abortion, immigration and government spending as they sought to defend their conservative credentials.
        For Mr. Giuliani, it was his support for abortion rights, a position that isolated him on a stage of 10 Republicans. For Mr. McCain, it was his identification with campaign finance and immigration legislation that was opposed by many in this audience. For Mr. Romney, it was his changing positions on abortion rights and gay rights that had made him the subject of suspicion for many Republicans in states like South Carolina.
        Mr. Giuliani, trying to move his campaign past a week in which he has tried to convince conservatives that his positions on social issues should not disqualify him from winning the Republican nomination, repeatedly described the election as a referendum on Republican policies against terrorism, as he reminded an audience of what he had done in New York after Sept. 11. At one point, one of Mr. Giuliani's lesser-known opponents, Representative Ron Paul of Texas, gave what turned out to be a big platform to Mr. Giuliani when he appeared to suggest that the United States invited the attacks of Sept. 11 by having originally invaded Iraq.
        ''May I comment on that?'' Mr. Giuliani said, looking grim. ''That's really an extraordinary statement. That's an extraordinary statement, as someone who lived through the attack of Sept. 11, that we invited the attack because we were attacking Iraq. I don't think I've heard that before, and I've heard some pretty absurd explanations for Sept. 11.''
        Mr. Giuliani was interrupted by cheers and applause. ''And I would ask the congressman to withdraw that comment and tell us that he didn't really mean that,'' he said.
        All the candidates once again offered strong affirmations of their support of the war in Iraq, reflecting the general consensus among them. ''We must succeed, and we cannot fail, and I will be the last man standing if necessary,'' Mr. McCain said.
        As they went through the doomsday terrorist scenario presented by the moderators, the candidates did not offer precise definitions of what they considered terrorism, though their nuanced responses suggested differences about how far they thought it was appropriate for interrogators to go to avert a terrorist attack.
        Enhanced interrogation techniques, which Mr. Romney said he would support, refer to methods outside those allowed by the Army's code of justice or the Geneva Conventions. The most publicly discussed technique that has reportedly been used on terrorism suspects involves what is known as water-boarding, where a prisoner is strapped down, head beneath his feet, as water is poured repeatedly on a cloth covering the mouth until the person thinks he is about to drown.
        The moderators from Fox News allowed and at times encouraged the candidates to mix it up among themselves.
        Mr. Romney sought to skewer Mr. McCain by association, noting his sponsorship of two bills that were particularly unpopular among conservative Republicans: an immigration bill that he was negotiating with Senator Edward M. Kennedy and the landmark campaign finance bill he drafted with Senator Russ Feingold, the Wisconsin Democrat.
        ''My fear is that McCain-Kennedy would do to immigration what McCain-Feingold has done to campaign finance and money in politics, and that's bad,'' Mr. Romney said.
        Mr. McCain responded with a reference to criticism of Mr. Romney for switching positions on issues like abortion and gay rights as he has moved from the political arena of Massachusetts, where he ran for governor and senator, to running for president. ''Well, I've taken and kept a consistent position on campaign finance reform,'' Mr. McCain said in response to Mr. Romney. ''I have kept a consistent position on right to life. And I haven't changed my position even on even-numbered years or have changed because of the different offices that I may be running for.''
        On several occasions, the candidates sought to divert problematic questions by trying to turn their attacks on Democrats. Mike Huckabee, the former governor of Arkansas, invoked John Edwards, the former senator from North Carolina, as part of an overall wave of criticism by this Republican field of Congress and the White House for spending too much money.
        ''We've had a Congress that has spent money like Edwards at a beauty shop,'' Mr. Huckabee said to roars of laughter at the allusion to Mr. Edwards's paying $400 for a haircut.
        When Mr. Giuliani was asked how conservatives could accept a candidate who was pro-abortion rights, gay rights and gun control, and who endorsed Mario M. Cuomo, a Democrat, for New York governor in 1994, he responded by invoking quotations by Senator Hillary Rodham Clinton of New York, displaying her as an advocate of a big, activist government. For that, Mr. Giuliani was chastised by one of the questioners, Chris Wallace.
        ''Mayor Giuliani, I'm going to give you another 30 seconds to actually answer my question,'' Mr. Wallace said to laughter and applause.
        The differences on abortion in the field were illuminated when Mr. Giuliani was asked to respond to a remark by Mr. Huckabee that saying he thought abortion was immoral, but that it should still be legal, was akin to saying, ''I hate slavery but people can go ahead and practice it.''
        Mr. Giuliani responded: ''Well, there is no circumstances under which I could possibly imagine anyone choosing slavery or supporting slavery. There are people, millions and millions of Americans, who are as of good conscience as we are, who make a different choice about abortion. And I think in a country where you want to keep government out of people's lives, or government out of people's lives from the point of view of coercion, you have to respect that.''
        Mr. Huckabee responded by praising Mr. Giuliani for being ''honest about his position, and I think that's a healthy thing for our party and for this debate.''
        But, he added, ''Now, if something is morally wrong, let's oppose it.'' Some of the leading candidates found their conservative credentials challenged not only by the moderators, but also by some of the lesser-known candidates in the field. Representative Tom Tancredo of Colorado said he had witnessed, in the course of his campaign, candidates move to more conservative positions on guns, abortion and immigration. ''You know it's beginning to sound like a Baptist tent revival meeting here,'' Mr. Tancredo said. ''And I'm glad to see these conversions. But I must tell you, I trust those conversions when they happen on the road to Damascus and not on the road to Des Moines.''
        And James Gilmore, the former governor of Virginia, recalled the debate these candidates had in California nearly two weeks ago and said: ''I think that some of the people on this stage were very liberal in characterizing themselves as conservatives, particularly on the issues of abortion and taxes and health care.''
        Their agreement to appear here reflected the state's importance in the party's nominating process: South Carolina is the third state to hold a nominating contest. This was the state that effectively ended Mr. McCain's bid for the presidency in 2000 when he lost badly here, after beating President Bush in the New Hampshire primary.
        The state's Republican electorate is overwhelmingly conservative and includes a large number of evangelical Christians. The death of the Rev. Jerry Falwell, the founder of the Moral Majority, prompted a rush of statements from Republican candidates paying tribute to his life, which also served as a reminder of the importance of conservative religious voters in Southern states.
        Correction:  May 17, 2007, Thursday  An article in some copies yesterday about the debate by the 10 Republican presidential candidates at the University of South Carolina in Columbia referred incorrectly to support for the war in Iraq among the candidates. One of them, Representative Ron Paul of Texas, opposes it; they do not all support the war. The article also misidentified the home state of another candidate, Representative Tom Tancredo, in some copies. It is Colorado, not Arizona.