Going Like 60 (Tick Tick Tick)

George J. Tenet accuses the White House of bungling the Iraq war and setting him up (''slam dunk'') to take the fall. John McCain says he shopped peacefully in a Baghdad market, then cameras pull back to show him in body armor surrounded by armed guards. John and Elizabeth Edwards explain why her cancer won't stop his run for the presidency. In a prison interview, L. Dennis Kozlowski, Tyco's former C.E.O., answers questions about his $6,000 shower curtain.
        Those ''60 Minutes'' reports were some of the more notable moments in television news this season, and all the more surprising for being on a stately news program that until recently seemed slated for extinction. Its creator, Don Hewitt, retired in 2004; some of the most famous television reporters, people like Ed Bradley and Mike Wallace, were dying, retiring or taking emeritus status. News cycles keep getting shorter and more Internet-driven, and younger viewers are fleeing network news in droves. Yet oddly enough, with many new faces and a lot less fanfare, ''60 Minutes'' is quietly flourishing.
        One of the paradoxes of the times is that while private lives of public figures have never been more examined, television interviews with politicians seem more and more insipid. Audiences dislike journalists as much as or more than elected officials, and that leaves reporters wary of being too pushy on camera. Its easier for putative news programs like ''Dateline'' to trap sexual predators and examine the content of Anna Nicole Smith's stomach than to hold a sustained give-and-take with Vice President Dick Cheney or Senator Hillary Rodham Clinton.
        ''60 Minutes'' has tried to hold onto its tradition of polite but discomfiting inquiry.
        Closing in on its 40th year on the air, this CBS Sunday night newsmagazine is to television news what ''Law &amp; Order'' is to procedural drama and ''Saturday Night Live'' is to comedy: proof that no star is irreplaceable and even series that seem exhausted or obsolete sometimes get a second -- or sixth -- wind.
        The turnaround is only barely perceptible in the ratings. At the moment ''60 Minutes'' is averaging 13.2 million viewers, a million more than last year, but that increase merely brings the series back to where it was in 2003.
        In 1991, when it was still riding a 23-season streak in the Top 10, ''60 Minutes'' drew 26.5 million viewers. Its heyday may be over, but it still has a large audience. So does ''Nightline,'' two years after the departure of Ted Koppel. Many younger viewers say they get all their news from ''The Daily Show With Jon Stewart,'' but millions of people still listen to National Public Radio every morning and regularly watch ''Frontline'' and ''Meet the Press.''
        Hard news, reported accurately and presented with intelligence and style, hasn't entirely disappeared; it just is too often eclipsed by the cacophony of celebrity-stalking entertainment shows and local news programs driven by weather, traffic and dieting tips.
        Trying to adapt to the times, ''60 Minutes'' has recruited some youth and glamour: CNN's Anderson Cooper is a contributor this season, and so is Lara Logan, CBS's chief foreign correspondent. The CBS anchor Katie Couric is perhaps the program's biggest star. But at heart, ''60 Minutes'' is still as stodgy and familiar as the tick-tick-tick of the Tag Heuer stopwatch. The strongest on-air personality at the moment is one of the program's blander faces: Scott Pelley, a former White House correspondent and 17-year veteran of CBS News.
        Mr. Pelley has the square jaw; even, all-American features; and wavy hair of yesteryear's local anchor, but he turns out to be a calmly compelling interviewer. He goaded Mr. Tenet, the former director of central intelligence, into almost Captain Queeg-like disquisition about Iraq, the C.I.A., torture and how he was mistreated by the president's top advisers. Mr. Pelley and a ''60 Minutes'' crew were with Senator McCain when this Republican presidential candidate took his infamous maximum-security shopping trip in Baghdad.
        Mr. Pelley took a skeptical tone with President Bush back in January when Mr. Bush announced that he was deploying more troops in Iraq, but like many other reporters, he refrained from challenging the president's assertions too overtly. He asked Mr. Bush how he felt after learning that there were no weapons of mass destruction after all; the president replied, ''The first thing I did was I put a commission together to take a good, hard look at what did go wrong.''
        Mr. Pelley didn't counter that. Actually the White House fiercely resisted an independent inquiry into intelligence failures and gave in only after intense lobbying by the families of 9/11 victims.
        Mr. Pelley is no Mike Wallace, but then again, neither is Mr. Wallace. Now a correspondent emeritus, Mr. Wallace recently interviewed the Republican presidential contender Mitt Romney at home with his wife, Ann, and their large, attractive family. Mr. Romney, a Mormon who supported abortion rights when he was governor of Massachussetts, told ''60 Minutes'' that he changed his mind after studying the ethics of embryonic stem cell research. Mrs. Romney received a diagnosis of multiple sclerosis in 1998. The likes of the National Multiple Sclerosis Society and Nancy Reagan argue that embryonic stem cell research might help provide a cure for that disease as well as for many others. Mr. Wallace didn't ask Mr. Romney or his wife about that.
        One reason could be that nowadays viewers judge reporters as harshly as their subjects -- in some cases more. Ms. Couric was criticized for coolly addressing the prospect of death with Elizabeth Edwards, even though Mrs. Edwards made it clear that she wanted neither pity nor gratuitous displays of emotion. ''I had somebody hug me in the last hour with a tear going down the side of her face,'' Mrs. Edwards said. ''And I'm actually hoping that's one of the things that this discussion will fix.''
        Many hosts of major news programs no longer even try to ask pertinent follow-up questions to politicians and government officials. ''60 Minutes'' may not always be as pestering as it once was, but it has found new relevancy by being better than most.
        THE TV WATCH