In Clinton Aide's Advice, An Early Voting Dilemma

        In Clinton Aide’s Advice, an Early Voting Dilemma

Tucked away in a Hillary Rodham Clinton campaign memorandum that leaked out this week was a brief note about a quirk in next year's primary election calendar that could have a profound effect on the strategies and spending of all the candidates.
        The memorandum, by Mike Henry, the deputy campaign manager for Mrs. Clinton, made a case for ignoring Iowa's first-in-the-nation caucuses next Jan. 14 and devoting the candidate's limited time and resources to contests in much bigger states in the following three weeks, including Florida, Arizona, California, New Jersey, Georgia and Texas.
        Mr. Henry noted that all of those states, and several others whose primaries are set for early February, will be mailing out millions of absentee ballots in the weeks before Iowans gather for their caucuses, potentially diminishing Iowa's importance. Iowa, along with New Hampshire, which holds its primary a week after the Iowa caucuses, have jealously guarded their status as early arbiters of who's hot and who's not.
        But next year, because of the extreme compression of the primary calendar, millions of voters will have the chance to register their choices before the Iowa and New Hampshire results are in. Mr. Henry warned that the Clinton campaign could not afford to ignore the vastly greater numbers of potential early voters in the big states that vote right after tiny Iowa and New Hampshire.
        ''Iowans will not be the first to vote,'' Mr. Henry wrote in his memorandum. ''Hundreds of thousands of voters will be voting in California, Florida and Texas. We must fund an expensive paid communications and a vote by mail/early vote program in these mega-states.''
        Ms. Clinton dismissed the advice to skip Iowa, where some recent polls show she is running third behind her chief Democratic rivals, former Senator John Edwards of North Carolina and Senator Barack Obama of Illinois. But her campaign has been silent on what it plans to do to woo early voters in the other states.
        This early-voting phenomenon is a big deal for all the candidates, and they are struggling with it. In California, for example, a third of the electorate in both primary and general elections votes absentee. The state will mail out some three million absentee ballots for the Feb. 5 primary starting on Jan. 7 (overseas and military voters from California will get their ballots in mid-December). Each presidential campaign will have to decide whether it is worth the money to try to reach these voters by mail, radio, television or door-to-door canvassing, a huge expense in a state the size of California.
        The same is true for Florida, which will hold its primary on Jan. 29 and mail its absentee ballots more than two weeks earlier. Mr. Henry noted that tens of thousands of voters in Arkansas, Arizona, New Jersey, New Mexico, Oklahoma, Tennessee, Utah, Colorado, Georgia, North Carolina and Texas will receive their ballots before Iowans crunch through the snow to their caucuses. Most of these states offer so-called no-excuse absentee voting, meaning that any registered voter can request an absentee ballot without giving a reason.
        New York, which will also hold its primary on Feb. 5, provides absentee ballots only to those who certify they will be away on Election Day or are disabled.
        ''Candidates are facing this much more complicated environment and are going to have to get out on the ground in these other states much earlier,'' said Paul Gronke, a political science professor at the University of Oregon and an expert on early voting. ''It's a fascinating study in voter behavior, too. Will voters in California hold their ballots, waiting to see what Iowa and New Hampshire do? Or will they feel they already know these candidates well enough by then, especially Hillary and Obama?''
        Mr. Gronke said he would be surprised if more than 10 percent of Florida or California voters cast their ballots early, and those voters very likely were strongly committed to their candidate and would not be swayed by the results in Iowa. In any case, their votes would not be counted until some weeks after the Iowa and New Hampshire results were announced.
        ''Reporters -- and the public -- rely on results, not on votes that may have been cast but have not yet been counted,'' he said. ''Certainly, it changes the political landscape when some percentage of the voters cast their ballot prior to Iowa. But I don't see any reason that this changes the importance of Iowa.''
        Carl Forti, a spokesman for Mitt Romney, the former governor of Massachusetts and one of the leading Republican presidential contenders, said that this foreshortened election cycle is unlike any other, and the potentially large numbers of early voters make it that much tougher. ''You have to find a new way to navigate the field,'' Mr. Forti said. He said that the Romney campaign had not yet decided whether, where or how to focus on early voters. But, he added, ''It is something you have to factor into your planning.''
        A senior strategist for Mr. Edwards, who has said he believes he must win in Iowa or New Hampshire to remain viable, said that the campaign would devote few resources to absentee voters in other states. ''We don't think many people will vote before Iowa,'' the Edwards aide said. ''If you see us spending money outside the first four states, it's because we're rolling in dough. But there's no way it's worth risking taking money and great staff out of Iowa and New Hampshire.''
        Aides to other candidates declined to discuss the question, saying it was a matter of internal strategy that they did not want to share with their competitors. But an aide to Senator John McCain, Republican of Arizona, said facetiously, ''I know I'm looking forward to casting my ballot on Christmas Day.''
        But he added, ''I'd be negligent in my job if I didn't consider the amount of early voting that is going to take place. I'd also be negligent if I told you how we intend to exploit it.''
        POLITICAL MEMO
        Correction:  May 30, 2007, Wednesday  An article on Sunday about early and absentee voting in next year's presidential primaries misidentified the academic affiliation of Paul Gronke, a professor of political science who is an expert on early voting. He is at Reed College in Portland, Ore., not the University of Oregon.