Obama Calls for Wider and Less Costly Health Care Coverage

        Obama Calls for Wider and Less Costly Health Care Coverage

Senator Barack Obama proposed a major overhaul of the nation's health care system on Tuesday, aimed at covering the nearly 45 million uninsured Americans and reducing premium costs for everyone else.
        In the biggest domestic policy proposal so far of his presidential campaign, Mr. Obama, the Illinois Democrat, said he would rely on a combination of the existing employer-based system and a new government program to make health insurance accessible to everyone. He also promised to reduce the cost of health insurance by helping with expenditures for catastrophic illnesses that are a major factor in driving up employers' rates.
        Throwing down a challenge to a powerful industry, Mr. Obama pledged new scrutiny and new limits on the profits of the biggest insurance companies, declaring it was simply ''the right thing to do.''
        Mr. Obama would pay for his plan by not renewing President Bush's tax cuts for the most affluent Americans -- those making more than $250,000 a year -- when they expire at the end of 2010, aides said. Campaign officials estimated that the net cost of the plan to the federal government would be $50 billion to $65 billion a year, when fully phased in, and said the revenues from rolling back the tax cuts were enough to cover it.
        Mr. Obama's speech came after months of criticism that his campaign lacked specificity and policy heft on complex issues like health care. It was also his first foray into an area that is widely considered the home terrain of his leading opponent for the Democratic nomination, Senator Hillary Rodham Clinton of New York, who has yet to detail her own proposal.
        The Obama plan drew from a long line of Democratic policy thinking; it reflects elements of proposals put forward by the Clintons, by Senator John Kerry in his 2004 presidential campaign and by former Senator John Edwards this year. It was built on advice from several economists, including Austan Goolsbee at the University of Chicago, David Cutler at Harvard and Stuart Altman at Brandeis.
        Rival Democrats, recognizing the stakes on this signature issue, responded quickly, arguing that because Mr. Obama would not require every American to have insurance, it is not a true universal health plan.
        Neera Tanden, policy director for Mrs. Clinton -- who had earlier delivered an economic policy speech to compete with Mr. Obama's -- welcomed Mr. Obama to the health care debate. Ms. Tanden added, ''Senator Clinton believes that in addition to making healthcare more accessible, we have to achieve true universal health care so that every American has health care coverage.''
        Mark Kornblau, a spokesman for Mr. Edwards's campaign, said, ''Any plan that does not cover all Americans is simply inadequate.''
        Others said the Democratic plans and approaches showed more agreement than ideological division.
        ''Voters will see more similarities than differences in the Democratic candidates' plans, and I think the edge will go to the candidate who convinces voters they can forge a consensus in Congress and get things done,'' said Drew Altman, president of the Kaiser Family Foundation, a health research group.
        Stuart Altman of Brandeis, who served in the Nixon administration and has advised many candidates and politicians since, said the Obama plan had major similarities not just to other Democratic proposals, but also to the Massachusetts health plan passed under Mitt Romney, now a candidate for the Republican presidential nomination, when he was governor. Both are efforts to build on the existing system, with a mix of employer-based coverage and expanded public programs. But Mr. Altman said there were also differences, notably that the Obama plan puts more responsibilities on employers and focuses more on controlling costs, and avoids a requirement in the Romney plan that individuals buy coverage.
        In his speech, Mr. Obama acknowledged that similar efforts to expand coverage had failed in the past, ''crushed under the weight of Washington politics and drug and insurance industry lobbying.''
        But he added, ''This cannot be one of those years.''
        His proposal includes a new requirement that employers either provide coverage to their employees or pay the government a set percentage of their payroll to provide it. Similar requirements have proven intensely controversial, notably in 1993-94, when the Clinton health care plan went down in large measure because of a small-business backlash.
        Obama advisers said the smallest businesses would be exempt from this requirement.
        Mr. Obama would create a public plan for individuals who cannot obtain group coverage through their employers or the existing government programs, like Medicaid or the State Children's Health Insurance Program. Children would be required to have health insurance. Subsidies would be available for those who need help with the cost of coverage.
        He would also create a National Health Insurance Exchange, a regulated marketplace of competing private health plans intended to give individuals other, more affordable options for coverage. The public plan would compete in that Insurance Exchange, advisers said.
        The Obama campaign revives an idea advanced by the Kerry campaign -- using the federal government to cushion employers from sudden, disastrous spikes in health expenditures, by reimbursing health plans for the cost of catastrophic illnesses among their employees. Because of this and other cost-containment proposals, Mr. Obama estimated his plan would save the typical family up to $2,500 a year in their health insurance costs.
        Mr. Obama described his plan to an audience at the University of Iowa, invoking the memory of Medicare and arguing that the time had come to finish the work of Harry S. Truman and Lyndon B. Johnson. He acknowledged that it would not be easy, but had to be done, because families who played by the rules were being driven into bankruptcy because of health care costs.
        ''It is simply not right that the skyrocketing profits of the drug and insurance industries are paid for by the skyrocketing premiums that come from the pockets of the American people,'' he said. ''This is not who we are. And this is not who we have to be.''
        In New Hampshire, Mrs. Clinton gave what her campaign had billed as a major policy address on income inequality. She promised to take steps to combat ''rising inequality and rising pessimism in our work force.''
        Mrs. Clinton said her prescriptions included reducing tax breaks for corporations, allowing Medicare to negotiate lower drug prices with pharmaceutical companies, eliminating incentives for companies to move jobs overseas and giving more students a chance to attend college.
        ''While productivity and corporate profits are up, the fruits of that success just haven't reached many of our families,'' she said. ''It's like trickle-down economics without the trickle.''