WEALTHY ENCLAVE OFFERS WINDFALL FOR CANDIDATES

        Wealthy Enclave Offers Windfall for Candidates

Senator John McCain made his pitch to this gilded shoreline suburb back in April. Former Gov. Mitt Romney of Massachusetts came on May 7, followed one night later by former President Bill Clinton on behalf of his wife, Senator Hillary Rodham Clinton. Last weekend, it was back-to-back appearances by Senator Barack Obama, topped off on Sunday with a visit from Rudolph W. Giuliani, the former New York mayor.
        With the mansions along its winding back roads now awash in hedge fund money, Greenwich has joined New York, Los Angeles and Silicon Valley as must stops on the presidential fund-raising tour, with prominent locals now boasting of candidate scuff marks on their basketball courts, Secret Service T-shirts in their closets and framed pictures of their children with the candidates on their mantels. For a town that has wealth and corporate clout to spare, the fund-raisers fill a void: access to a potential White House resident.
        ''The people I know are absolutely thrilled to have presidential candidates come in because, as you know, Connecticut is somewhat irrelevant in the primary process,'' said Adam Wood, a longtime Democratic organizer in Connecticut. ''So it's a great opportunity for Connecticut and for Greenwich to have the future president of the United States there.''
        As Connecticut's richest town, Greenwich has always held some allure for politicians looking to raise money and make influential friends, but with several of the current presidential contenders wanting to raise upwards of $500 million to stay competitive through the general election, the richest of the town's 61,000 residents are being wooed more than ever.
        An analysis by The New York Times of campaign filings through March 31 tracked $1.038 million in gifts related to the presidential race from donors with Greenwich ZIP codes. That windfall is roughly two-fifths the $2.56 million kicked in by those same ZIP codes during the entire 2004 presidential race. The preliminary 2007 tally does not capture more than $1 million believed to have been raised since then, as the pace of fund-raising here has intensified.
        In one notable break with the past, Greenwich money is increasingly going to Democrats, a reflection of national trends. Of the $1.038 million donated through March, six Democratic candidates shared 54 percent of the pot, and three Republicans claimed 46 percent. Democrats got 45 percent of the $2.56 million raised the last time around, and the incumbent Republican candidate, President Bush, whose father was born here, swept the other 55 percent.
        People who are active in politics offer several explanations. With Greenwich's hedge fund industry booming, many of its newest moguls do not have entrenched political allegiances and reflect the larger shift toward Democratic candidates seen elsewhere in Fairfield County. Last year's Senate bid by Ned Lamont, a local Democrat, may also have left the town more fluid than it once was, as some Republicans registered as Democrats for the primary and then switched back.
        With so many events to choose from, some well-to-do residents are attending more than one, taking comfort in the fact that donations are generally capped by law at $2,300 for primaries and $2,300 for the general election. ''Some people just like to see the candidate and don't mind buying the ticket,'' said James Lash, the town's first selectman. ''It's like going to the theater.''
        For those who can, the protocol becomes clear. Eat first because campaigns can be stingier with the treats than hosts would be if they were paying for the spread. Allison Frantz, for instance, acknowledged that holding the Romney event in her home was ''a challenge because it was a really small budget'' but said she found ways to be creative, like using cookies in lieu of floral centerpieces. ''They're not going for the food,'' her friend, Elizabeth Oberbeck, said of the crowd.
        Do not expect anything expensive to drink for the same reason. Ooh and aah when the hostess shows you her child's history project that the former president signed or regales you with details about how this politician or that tossed a football with her brood.
        ''The money is getting younger, so all these people have young kids,'' said a frequent guest who requested anonymity because she did not want to offend her hosts. She called the mementos ''the newest trophy'' for the set that has it all.
        ''It's cool and impressive to be hosting these things,'' the guest said. ''It's what you do when you can have it all and your money can buy you so many things. But to actually have a presidential candidate or former president come to your home and visit with your friends, it's a rare experience, and it's joining the things in Greenwich that are de rigueur about living in the community.''
        Harry Clark, a public policy consultant based in Greenwich who was a co-host for a McCain fund-raiser at the Belle Haven Country Club in April, said, ''Everyone on the Republican side is window-shopping, and on the Democratic side, there's tremendous curiosity about Obama.''
        A former top aide to Jack Kemp, the former quarterback and Republican politician, Mr. Clark was intrigued enough himself to have written a check that entitled him to attend one of Mr. Obama's recent ''drop-bys,'' as the Obama campaign called them.
        Judging from what was reported through March, the current leaders of the pack in Greenwich are Mr. Romney, with $200,627 on the Republican side, and Senator Christopher J. Dodd of Connecticut, with $190,900 on the Democratic side. Close behind are Mrs. Clinton, a New York Democrat, with $166,550, and Mr. Giuliani, a Republican, with $154,350. Mr. McCain, an Arizona Republican, raised $124,000, and Mr. Obama, an Illinois Democrat, raised $106,000.
        The campaigns were reluctant to discuss their fund-raising strategies or their recent galas, which were roped off to reporters.
        The rankings are expected to shift when second-quarter results are reported. Mr. Romney's supporters say they raised at least $550,000 from the dinner he attended with 350 guests on May 7 at the waterfront home of Mrs. Frantz and her husband, L. Scott Frantz, a financier who has been a backer of Republican causes. Admission was $1,000. For $2,300, the campaign threw in a photograph with the candidate.
        Organizers of a benefit the following night for Mrs. Clinton, which was held at the home of Clifton and Deborah Robbins, charged $2,300 per ticket but limited the attendance so they could bill the event as an ''intimate'' dinner. Not to be left out, Mr. Giuliani also asked $2,300 a head of the 130 or so people who turned out to meet him last Sunday at the home of Douglas Korn, a Bear Stearns executive, and Mr. Korn's wife, Elizabeth.
        It was Mr. Obama's four-hour dash through town, however, that had everyone chatting, mostly about the hundreds of thousands of dollars he gleaned. The evening began at the waterfront home of the billionaire Paul Tudor Jones II, a hedge fund titan. His home, worth an estimated $25 million, features an underground garage roomy enough for more than 25 cars. It has been described in Vanity Fair as ''a cross between Tara and a national monument.''
        Another billionaire, George Soros, a longtime supporter of liberal causes, was a co-chairman of the event, which drew 300 guests who were asked to pay $2,300 apiece. A private reception was tossed in for about a dozen people who had raised $25,000 or more for the candidate. By many accounts, waiters in white tuxedos flitted among the crowd, and the supermodel Tyra Banks added sparkle to the guest list.
        Leaving that affair, Mr. Obama then met with a mostly Greenwich crowd of 150 people in a gated section of town known as Conyers Farm, which straddles Connecticut and New York. His host was the former New York Knicks basketball player Allan Houston and his wife, Tamara, whose home has a Greenwich address but is in Armonk, N.Y. Tickets cost $1,000 to $2,300.
        When Mr. Obama took note of his host's basketball court and seemed eager to take a few shots, Mr. Houston joked that he would not think of wiping the scuff marks of ''the future president'' off the court, Greenwich Time reported.
        When estimating how much was raised by an event, campaign officials cautioned against assuming that everyone in the crowd had paid. Tom Swan, who managed the Senate campaign last year for Mr. Lamont, said people were sometimes admitted free to lend ''the impression you have this much support.''
        ''Sometimes, it's to try to cultivate donors, and sometimes there are really good volunteers or folks who had maxed out previously and you don't want to alienate them,'' Mr. Swan said.
        Those who are consigned to watch from the sidelines generally take the visits in stride, said Mr. Lash, the first selectman. Doubling as the town's police commissioner, Mr. Lash must often help secure safe passage for dignitaries and deal with those who are rankled by the occasional traffic snarls.
        Mr. Clinton's visit to Greenwich, which involved Secret Service protection, probably cost the town $4,000 to $5,000, Mr. Lash said -- a tenth of what it cost last fall when President Bush dropped in via helicopter at Binney Park to attend a fund-raiser for the state Republican Party, which was also held at the Frantz home.
        As much as the cost, Mr. Lash recalled, the president's visit caused howls because it disrupted the girls soccer league that ordinarily uses the park.
        Correction:  May 30, 2007, Wednesday  Because of an editing error, an article on Monday about the position of Greenwich, Conn., as a must stop on the campaign fund-raising trail misidentified the birthplace of former President George Bush. He was born in Milton, Mass. -- not Greenwich, where President Bush outraised Democrats in the 2004 campaign.