G.O.P. Candidates at Odds Over Immigration Overhaul

The Republican presidential candidates waged verbal combat last night in the Congressional battle over a proposed immigration overhaul, with Senator John McCain, an author of a pending compromise plan, defending the controversial proposals in a Republican debate in Goffstown, N.H., and demanding that his competitors offer ''a better idea.''
        Mr. McCain found himself at odds with former Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani of New York and former Gov. Mitt Romney of Massachusetts, who each criticized the Senate plan as woefully lacking in border security and immigration enforcement measures, including a uniform method to identify immigrants and limits on certain types of visas.
        ''It's a typical Washington mess,'' Mr. Giuliani said in his first heated face-off of the campaign with his past political ally, Mr. McCain. ''Everybody compromises, four or five compromises, and the compromises leave you with the following conclusion. The litmus test you should have for legislation is, is it going to make things better? And when you look at these compromises, it is quite possible it will make things worse.''
        Mr. Romney, who has been accused by Mr. McCain of ''pandering'' to voters by criticizing the immigration proposal, passed up an invitation by the moderator of the debate, Wolf Blitzer of CNN, to hit back.
        ''Well, he's my friend,'' Mr. Romney said of Mr. McCain, downplaying their recent feud. ''He campaigned for me two times.'' Then Mr. Romney pivoted to criticize the plan's ''Z visas'' as a hole that would allow many illegal immigrants to stay in the United States ''for the rest of their lives.'' Under the Z-visa provision, if immigrants paid fines and passed background checks, they could obtain a visa that would be valid for four years and could be repeatedly renewed.
        But Mr. Romney was not completely correct in saying illegal immigrants would be put ahead of all people who have been waiting to come to this country legally. If they wanted permanent-residence visas, or green cards, they would have to wait in line behind people who have already applied.
        Mr. McCain forcefully defended the plan, citing its employment-verification system and its strict citizenship rules for illegal immigrants. And he pointedly took on Mr. Giuliani. ''Rudy, you just described our legislation, so I'd be glad to have a further conversation with you,'' Mr. McCain said.
        After months of introducing themselves to voters, the leading candidates came into their third televised debate, at St. Anselm Collge, with increasingly well-formed political identities, though polls suggest that none yet have captivated wide swaths of the Republican electorate.
        Mr. Giuliani again portrayed himself as the tough-minded, blunt-speaking protector of a nation in danger, saying it would have been unthinkable for the United States not to have invaded Iraq to remove Saddam Hussein from power. Mr. McCain again showed himself willing to buck party orthodoxy, not just on immigration but, to some degree, on whether English should be the national language (he noted that Navajos in Arizona have a proud culture and use their own language). And Mr. Romney again portrayed himself as a tax-cutter and a conservative, despite his moderate positions on social issues in the past.
        Not on the stage here but creating his own mighty buzz because of his relatively clear conservative positions, was a Republican preparing to enter the race, former Senator Fred D. Thompson of Tennessee. Mr. Thompson appeared on Fox News immediately after the debate, and was asked about criticism he is already facing as a potential candidate.
        ''It's a badge of honor to get attacked by some of these bozos,'' he said.
        More so than in previous appearances, the candidates were willing to criticize President Bush and his administration. Representative Duncan Hunter of California ripped the immigration legislation, calling it the ''the Bush-McCain-Kennedy'' plan; Representative Tom Tancredo of Colorado said Mr. Bush would ''never darken the doorstep of the White House'' if Mr. Tancredo were elected president because of the candidate's anger over White House immigration and education policies and the Medicare prescription drug benefit.
        But the Republicans appeared downright eager to focus their collective attention on the Democrats and in particular Senator Hillary Rodham Clinton. Former Gov. Mike Huckabee of Arkansas even introduced himself by tweaking former President Bill Clinton, saying: ''I'm from the small town of Hope. You may have heard of it. All I ask you is, give us one more chance.''
        Mr. McCain, meanwhile, questioned Mrs. Clinton as a potential commander in chief by challenging her statement, in the Democratic debate Sunday night, that the Iraq war was the responsibility of the Bush administration.
        ''When Senator Clinton says this is Mr. Bush's war, that this is President Bush's war -- when President Clinton was in power, I didn't say that Bosnia, our intervention there was President Clinton's war,'' he said. ''When we intervened in Kosovo, I didn't say it was President Clinton's war.''
        At another point, Mr. McCain and another candidate, Senator Sam Brownback of Kansas, acknowledged that they did not read the classified national intelligence estimate, which was made available to all senators, before they voted to go to war. Mr. Hunter, who serves on the House Armed Services Committee, said he did read the report.
        The Republican candidates were also asked if they would support pardoning I. Lewis Libby Jr. and while none of the top candidates said, outright, that they would take such a course if president, they also voiced dismay at his sentence of 30 months in prison. Mr. Giuliani was the most outspoken of the lead candidates, calling the sentence ''way out of line.'' Citing his experience both as a prosecutor and recommending pardons while working in the Justice Department under President Ronald Reagan, he said he would seriously consider it, especially in light of the harsh sentence.
        When Mr. Blitzer tried to cut him off, Mr. Giuliani stopped him, saying, ''A man's life is at stake.'' He said that it was an ''incomprehensible'' situation made all the more disturbing because there was no underlying crime, and that he had a real problem with the sentence.
        Mr. Romney, following Mr. Giuliani, also criticized the sentence and left the door open for a pardon. Mr. McCain, who answered first, said that because the case was being appealed he did not think it proper to comment.
        On climate change, a matter that divides many Republican voters, Mr. Giuliani said that Americans had to ''accept the view'' of scientists that global warming is real and caused by human activity. He said it was ''frustrating and really dangerous for us to see money going to our enemies'' in the form of payments for foreign oil.
        Several candidates were also asked about ways they, in office, would put President Bush to work as a former president. Former Gov. Tommy Thompson of Wisconsin quipped, ''I certainly would not send him to the United Nations,'' which stirred some slightly awkward laughter from the audience and blank stares from his rivals. (The other participants in the debate were former Gov. Jim Gilmore of Virginia and Representative Ron Paul of Texas.)
        Mr. Giuliani also injected a moment of humor into the debate when he was asked about the writings of a Catholic bishop who was critical of Mr. Giuliani's support of abortion rights. As Mr. Giuliani began to defend himself, there were crackles of lightning outside the debate hall -- prompting other candidates to step away from Mr. Giuliani, as if a bolt were about to strike him.
        ''For someone who went to parochial schools all of his life,'' he said, ''this is a very frightening thing that is happening right now.''