Hispanic Voters Gain New Clout With Democrats

        Hispanic Voters Gain New Clout With Democrats

Helped by the fight over immigration, Democratic presidential candidates are courting Hispanic voters like never before, prompted by a string of early primaries in states with sizable Hispanic voting blocs.
        It has forced candidates to hire outreach consultants, to start Spanish-language Web sites and to campaign vigorously before Hispanic audiences.
        The battle for Hispanic voters is a result of the decision by several states with large Hispanic populations to move their presidential primaries to early 2008, including California, Florida and New York. Roughly two-thirds of the nation's Hispanic residents live in nine of the states holding Democratic primaries or caucuses on or before Feb. 5.
        Republican and Democratic strategists, as well as independent analysts, say the influence of Hispanic voters is likely to be amplified next year because of an unusually intense response in many Hispanic communities to immigration policy. Conservative Republicans, with the help of some left-leaning Democrats, teamed up on Thursday to derail an immigration bill in the Senate that would have provided a path to citizenship for illegal immigrants.
        It is in the new early primary states where Democrats hope the outreach efforts bear fruit. In the last presidential election, Hispanic voters accounted for a significant part of the overall Democratic primary electorate in California (16 percent), New York (11 percent), Arizona (17 percent) and Florida (9 percent), all states that will hold primaries by Feb 5.
        Sergio Bendixen, a pollster hired by Senator Hillary Rodham Clinton's campaign to study Hispanic voting trends, said: ''The Hispanic vote has never been all that important in the presidential primary process in the United States. But that will change in 2008.''
        At this early stage, Mrs. Clinton, a New York Democrat, appears best poised to benefit from the heightened Hispanic role in the primary process. She has already captured a prized endorsement, of Mayor Antonio R. Villaraigosa of Los Angeles, one of the nation's most prominent Hispanic politicians.
        Mrs. Clinton is also well known and liked by many Hispanics, with several national New York Times/CBS News polls from the past few months showing that about 60 percent of registered Hispanic voters who identify themselves as Democrats have a favorable view of her, while a quarter do not.
        Meanwhile, Senator Barack Obama, Democrat of Illinois, remains a blank slate to many Hispanic voters, polls show, with 40 percent having no opinion of him. But his aspirational biography could prove a draw as more Hispanic voters get to know him.
        Former Senator John Edwards is even less well known among Democratic Hispanic voters. While a third have a positive view of Mr. Edwards and fewer than 10 percent have an unfavorable view of him, 6 in 10 are unable to offer an opinion.
        The only Hispanic in the race, Gov. Bill Richardson of New Mexico, a Democrat, is working to build a base and establish a political identity beyond the Southwest.
        Many Democrats were as troubled by the Senate immigration bill as were Republicans, but for decidedly different reasons. Mrs. Clinton expressed concerns about the legislation, particularly a provision that makes it harder for legal immigrants in the United States to bring relatives from abroad. Mr. Obama said that he would have supported the bill, but that he too had similar concerns about the provision, according to his aides.
        On the Republican side, two of the main candidates, Rudolph W. Giuliani and Mitt Romney, opposed the immigration bill, while Senator John McCain played a main role in drafting the legislation, only to face a huge backlash from conservative Republicans raising alarms about what they call a flood of immigrants.
        The bill's setback -- a major defeat for President Bush -- could complicate Republican efforts to win over the fast-growing Hispanic electorate and help Democrats solidify their hold on these voters, an electoral prize expected to increase in importance in coming decades. Surveys showed that Hispanics were a small part of the Republican primary vote in 2000, with their greatest influence being in California, where they made up 9 percent of the vote.
        The debate over immigration has spurred Hispanic leaders and voters to mobilize like few issues in recent memory have. The National Association of Latino Elected Officials has joined with the Hispanic television network Univision on a national campaign to help Hispanic residents fill out citizenship applications and to help those who are already citizens register to vote.
        Stephanie Pillersdorf, a spokeswoman for Univision, said the number of Hispanic residents who had applied for citizenship in Los Angeles County alone had gone up 146 percent since the campaign started several months ago.
        The scramble for Hispanic support is evident both within the campaigns and out on the trail.
        On Friday, Mrs. Clinton spoke to Hispanic leaders in the Bronx, where she accused Republicans of undermining the immigration bill in the Senate. ''The bill was mostly killed by people who don't want any immigration reform and don't want a path toward legalization,'' she said. ''There's a very big anti-immigrant feeling that is influencing the problem right now, particularly on the Republican side.''
        Earlier this month, Mr. Obama traveled to Nevada, a heavily Hispanic state that moved its caucus to Jan. 19, and sat down for interviews with Spanish-language television and newspaper reporters.
        Mr. Edwards, who hopes his populist appeal will draw support from Hispanics, is dispatching his political director, David Medina, to meet with members of Democratic Hispanic Caucus of Florida. Mr. Richardson alternates between English and Spanish on the campaign trail. Senator Christopher J. Dodd, Democrat of Connecticut, also often likes to display his fluency in Spanish, including when he announced his candidacy on CNN en Español.
        Republicans have been making similar efforts. Mr. McCain has been making appearances before Hispanic audiences around the country, including in Miami, where he recently gave a speech on immigration. He also has access to a deep bench of prominent Hispanic leaders who fill in for him on Spanish-language radio and television programs, including Representatives Lincoln Diaz-Balart, Mario Diaz-Balart and Ileana Ros-Lehtinen, all of Florida. The senator himself has also made appearances on Univision and Telemundo. Mr. Romney, in turn, announced on Friday the creation of a steering committee to help him attract Hispanic voters.
        Strategists for several Democratic campaigns say the new calendar has set the stage for Hispanic voters to have much more influence in picking the parties' presidential nominees than they did when states like Iowa and New Hampshire were essentially alone among the early states in the nominating process.
        In fact, in the 2004 race, Senator John Kerry did not assemble a Hispanic outreach and media operation until about five months before the general election.
        By contrast, the Clinton campaign has already put in place a driven Hispanic outreach team that, among other things, issues press releases in Spanish on a regular basis and has a stable of Spanish-speaking surrogates to fill in for Mrs. Clinton at events that focus on Hispanics. It has also assigned a prominent role to its campaign manager, Patti Solis Doyle, a woman of Mexican descent who has been one of Mrs. Clinton's most trusted advisers and friends since her days as first lady of Arkansas. Mrs. Doyle, who played a crucial role in getting the recent endorsement from Mr. Villaraigosa, has made herself available for interviews with Hispanic organizations of all sorts.
        Democrats are optimistic about their prospects of making large gains among Hispanic voters, mindful of the progress they made in the 2006 midterm elections, when only 26 percent of Hispanics voted for Republican Congressional candidates. That was down from 44 percent in 2004, when Mr. Bush was at the top of the ticket, according to nationwide exit polls conducted by Edison/Mitofsky.
        While Mr. Bush's popularity with Hispanics had been a factor in drawing large numbers of them to the Republican Party, many Hispanics appear to be returning to the Democratic fold as conservative efforts gained momentum last year to restrict immigration and build a wall along the Mexican border.
        Democrats are doing what they can to encourage that return. Mr. Obama has traveled to Nevada several times to meet with members and leaders of a culinary workers' union, most of whom are Hispanic women who work in Las Vegas hotels and casinos. The Obama campaign says the union could play a decisive role in generating voter turnout when the state holds its caucus next January.
        The campaign is also sending dozens of volunteers this weekend to pass out Spanish-language literature in heavily Hispanic cities like Los Angeles, San Diego, Las Vegas, Phoenix, Houston and San Antonio, and is making videos available on its Web site with closed captioning in Spanish.
        Mr. Edwards, in turn, is betting that his antipoverty campaign of the last few years, including helping unions organize in industries with large numbers of Hispanic workers, will give him an edge.
        Earlier this year, he met with Arturo Rodriguez, the president of the farm workers' union, and several hundred union members in Fresno, Calif. Mr. Edwards's campaign has also sent prominent Hispanic supporters to act as surrogates for him on the campaign trial, including Patricia Madrid, the former attorney general of New Mexico, who recently went to Nevada to meet with Hispanic politicians and activists.
        If any candidate can appeal to the ethnic pride of Hispanic voters, it is Mr. Richardson, the New Mexico governor, who often points to his Mexican roots (his mother is a native of Mexico) when appearing before Hispanic audiences.
        The main problem for Mr. Richardson is that he is a relatively unknown figure among Hispanic voters, as well as the general electorate. To raise his profile among Hispanics, Mr. Richardson has turned to prominent Hispanics, including Gloria Molina, a Los Angeles County supervisor, who introduced him at the rally where he recently announced his candidacy.
        David Contarino, Mr. Richardson's campaign manager, predicted that his candidacy would become a matter of ''interest and pride'' among Hispanic voters once they learned of his record and roots.
        ''His name is Bill Richardson; that does not necessarily communicate his background,'' Mr. Contarino said dryly.