By Taking On the Biggest Donors, McCain Is Taking a Big Risk, Too

        Taking On Big Donors, McCain Takes a Big Risk

A ranking Republican on the Senate Armed Services Committee like Senator John McCain could normally bank on a bonanza of campaign contributions from the defense industry, especially if he was under pressure to raise money fast.
        But as Mr. McCain races to play catch-up with his Republican presidential primary rivals before the end of the second quarter, he is only reminding military companies and lobbyists why they have never liked him. ''Defense contractors are more concerned with winning the next contract than performing on the current one,'' he charged at a recent campaign stop.
        At a critical moment for him, his presidential campaign may be paying the price for a career of positions seemingly calculated to alienate constituencies that according to Washington custom should be prime sources of campaign cash. Mr. McCain's campaign filings show just $61,000 from the military industry in the first quarter -- less than half as much as the long-shot campaign of Democratic Senator Christopher J. Dodd of Connecticut, according to the nonpartisan Center for Responsive Politics.
        The twist is lost on no one: a candidate who has spent decades fighting to minimize the influence of money on politics is under extraordinary pressure to scare up tens of millions of dollars to prove he can jump-start his campaign. And after months of trying to make up with factions of the conservative coalition he has snubbed in the past, fund-raising has turned into another example of the balancing act he faces as he tries to appeal to the Republican establishment without giving up his aura as a straight-talking reformer.
        He does have some wealthy natural allies: American Indian casino owners, who appreciate his investigation of schemes by corrupt lobbyists to bilk tribal clients, have supported him eagerly in the past. But Mr. McCain has foresworn accepting any contributions from the casino owners, to avoid the appearance of a conflict of interest.
        Now Mr. McCain is jetting to 35 fund-raising events in the 30 days of June, hoping to raise more than $100,000 at each from small groups of big donors. He is passing the hat in six states -- Georgia, Texas, Arizona, Alabama, Massachusetts and Florida -- in just the five days ending Tuesday.
        Nor has he shied away from his sponsorship of the McCain-Feingold campaign finance law intended to curb the power of big donors, even as he races through his monthlong fund-raising spree.
        ''There are plenty of Republicans who don't think McCain-Feingold has accomplished what it was designed to accomplish and it is infringing on free speech,'' said Lawrence E. Bathgate, a New Jersey real estate mogul and former Republican party finance director who is a top fund-raiser for Mr. McCain. ''I feel that way. But he is still my candidate.''
        His presidential campaign did receive more first-quarter money than any other candidate from telephone utilities -- $123,000, out of a total take of $12.5 million -- who fear his power as an influential former chairman of the Senate Commerce Committee. As chairman, he often pushed for rules that would help the Bell telephone companies compete against the cable companies to provide Internet access and other services.
        But Mr. McCain also frequently irked the telephone industry by taking the side of consumer advocates, including trying to end the ''universal service'' fees the phone companies tack onto consumers' bills. He earned the lasting enmity of the cable companies by attacking them as price-gouging, unregulated monopolies. He was the only Republican to vote against the 1996 telecommunications overhaul, bucking virtually the entire industry on the grounds that the legislation neglected consumers. His most recent Senate campaign received less from the telephone companies than many others in Congress, including Senator Hillary Rodham Clinton, the New York Democrat.
        ''He wants to be independent, to make decisions free from the influence of special interests -- God bless him,'' said Kim Bayliss, a Democratic telecommunications lobbyist. ''But those are the people with money, and they are only going to give their money because you have been with them or you are going to be with them.''
        There is of course a political benefit to Mr. McCain in being seen as untrustworthy to those who control big pools of corporate and special interest money. But there is little doubt that his record in Congress has made remaining financially competitive in the presidential race more difficult.
        Once the presumptive Republican front-runner, Mr. McCain stunned political analysts with a first-quarter fund-raising total that badly trailed his leading rivals, admitting disappointment and vowing to catch up. Bu the McCain campaign brought in just $7 million in April and May, one person familiar with the campaign's internal tallies said, speaking anonymously because the totals are confidential.
        Trying to manage expectations, his advisers are saying publicly that their only goal is to exceed the $12.5 million Mr. McCain brought in the first quarter. But that result would do nothing to narrow the gap behind the growing war chests of his main rivals for his party's nomination, former Gov. Mitt Romney of Massachusetts and former Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani of New York, who expect to exceed their first quarter totals as well.
        The sprint for big checks is a stark contrast to his insurgent campaign for the Republican nomination eight years ago, when Mr. McCain relied more than any candidate on anonymous small donors mailing in checks. Out of about $29 million in total contributions to his 2000 campaign, about a third of his donors gave less than $200 and fewer than about a third gave more than $1,000, according to the Center for Responsive Politics.
        Those small donors applauded his attacks on special interests, but the same crusades can be liabilities with the big Republican fund-raisers, contributors and political action committees he is courting to remain competitive, his advisers say.
        All campaigns play up their fund-raising challenges in order to cast their ultimate totals in the best light, but both campaign finance records and the views of Washington lobbyists suggest that Mr. McCain has consistently turned off the constituencies that have been expected to make up his financial base.
        The military industry and its lobbyists, for example, always give heavily to the handful of lawmakers who control military spending; that is what fuels their business.
        Last year, for example, the industry gave $244,000 to the chairman of the House armed services committee at the time, Representative Duncan Hunter, even though he faced scant opposition in his California district.
        But military industry lobbyists say they have long dreaded the prospect that Mr. McCain might ascend to the chairmanship of the committee, much less the presidency. He is the Senate's most outspoken critic of military procurement policies, big Pentagon contracts, and especially earmarks -- the Congressional add-ons to military spending bills that contractors crave.
        ''McCain has been a one-man wrecking crew,'' said a prominent military lobbyist, speaking on condition of anonymity because he lobbies the committee.
        Mr. McCain has sometimes chalked up his fund-raising problems to his own lack of enthusiasm for the asking for money. ''When you don't like to do something,'' he told reporters on an April bus trip through New Hampshire shortly after the disclosure of his disappointing first quarter, letting his voice trail off. ''But we're doing better. I'm working a lot harder at it. We'll do better. We'll do a lot better.''
        If Mr. McCain feels any pressure, he does not show it, some fund-raisers said. Minutes before the start of a $2,300-a-head fund-raiser last Sunday at the Sonoma Valley home of the venture capitalist J. Gary Shansby, Mr. McCain was picking and eating berries as though he had not a care in the world, said Mr. Shansby, who has committed to raise $1 million.
        Several fund-raisers said Mr. McCain was no more likely to tailor his messages to his donors in person than he has been in the Senate.
        ''I tell him all the time: 'Everyone knows where you are on Iraq. Let's talk about the environment, pork barrel spending, health care, dependence on foreign oil,' '' Mr. Shansby said, reflecting the concerns of wealthy Sonoma Valley Republicans -- many of whom are skeptical of the war.
        Mr. McCain nonetheless made his support for the war the centerpiece of his fund-raiser. ''He gets very agitated about a few issues,'' Mr. Shansby said, ''the war, immigration reform, campaign finance.''
        POLITICAL MEMO